{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2580
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red240\green185\blue38;\red60\green60\blue60;
\red15\green112\blue1;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c95686\c76863\c18824;\cssrgb\c30196\c30196\c30196;
\cssrgb\c0\c50196\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22180\viewh19100\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1984 By George Orwell \cb1 \
Part One \
\pard\tx276\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2  1984 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Chapter 1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \dn32 I\up0 t was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were strik- ing thirteen. Winston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the vile wind, slipped quickly \
through the glass doors of Victory Mansions, though not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from enter- ing along with him. \
The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it a coloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall. It depicted simply an enor- mous face, more than a metre wide: the face of a man of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and rugged- ly handsome features. Winston made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Even at the best of times it was sel- dom working, and at present the electric current was cut off during daylight hours. It was part of the economy drive in preparation for Hate Week. The flat was seven flights up, and Winston, who was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went slowly, resting several times on the way. On each landing, opposite the lift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It was one of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you about when you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING \
YOU, the caption beneath it ran.\uc0\u8232 Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of fig- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
ures which had something to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from an oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of the right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat, though the words were still distinguish- able. The instrument (the telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way of shutting it off complete- ly. He moved over to the window: a smallish, frail figure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overalls which were the uniform of the party. His hair was very fair, his face naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razor blades and the cold of the win- ter that had just ended. \
Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down in the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there seemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plastered everywhere. The blackmoustachio\'92d face gazed down from every commanding corner. There was one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into Winston\'92s own. Down at street level an- other poster, torn at one corner, flapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering the single word IN- GSOC. In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down between the roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away again with a curving flight. It was the po- lice patrol, snooping into people\'92s windows. The patrols did \
4 1984 \
not matter, however. Only the Thought Police mattered. Behind Winston\'92s back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away about pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. The telescreen received and \
transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winston made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it, moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vi- sion which the metal plaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of course no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. How often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individual wire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all the time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted to. You had to live\'97did live, from habit that became instinct\'97in the assumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except in darkness, every movement scrutinized. \
Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer, though, as he well knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometre away the Ministry of Truth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape. This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste\'97this was London, \
chief city of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of Oceania. He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him whether London had always been quite like this. Were there always these vis- tas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with baulks of timber, their windows patched with card- board and their roofs with corrugated iron, their crazy \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
garden walls sagging in all directions? And the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the wil- low-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where the bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chick- en-houses? But it was no use, he could not remember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright- lit tableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible. \
The Ministry of Truth\'97Minitrue, in Newspeak [New- speak was the official language of Oceania. For an account of its structure and etymology see Appendix.]\'97was star- tlingly different from any other object in sight. It was an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white con- crete, soaring up, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the air. From where Winston stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face in elegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party: \
WAR IS PEACE\uc0\u8232 FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH \
The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms above ground level, and corresponding ramifications below. Scattered about London there were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size. So completely did they dwarf the surrounding architec- ture that from the roof of Victory Mansions you could see \
 1984 \
all four of them simultaneously. They were the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatus of government was divided. The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itself with news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts. The Ministry of Peace, which concerned itself with war. The Ministry of Love, which maintained law and order. And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsible for economic affairs. Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluv, and Miniplenty. \
The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windows in it at all. Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, nor within half a kilometre of it. \
It was a place impossible to enter except on official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze of barbed- wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests. Even the streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faced guards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons. \
Winston turned round abruptly. He had set his features into the expression of quiet optimism which it was advis- able to wear when facing the telescreen. He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen. By leaving the Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in the canteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen except a hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for tomorrow\'92s breakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquid with a plain white label marked \
VICTORY GIN. It gave off a sickly, oily smell, as of Chinese rice-spirit. Winston poured out nearly a teacupful, nerved \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medi- cine. \
Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes. The stuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had the sensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. The next moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the world began to look more cheerful. He took a cigarette from a crumpled packet marked VICTORY CIGARETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon the tobacco fell out on to the floor. With the next he was more successful. He went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stood to the left of the telescreen. From the table drawer he took out a penholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank book with a red back and a marbled cover. \
For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusual position. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, where it could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite the window. To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winston was now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably been intended to hold bookshelves. By sitting in the alcove, and keeping well back, Winston was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, so far as sight went. He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayed in his present position he could not be seen. It was partly the unusual ge- ography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was now about to do. \
But it had also been suggested by the book that he had 8 1984 \
just taken out of the drawer. It was a peculiarly beautiful book. Its smooth creamy paper, a little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured for at least for- ty years past. He could guess, however, that the book was much older than that. He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little junk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did not now remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelming desire to possess it. Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shops (\'92dealing on the free market\'92, it was called), but the rule was not strictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces and razor blades, which it was impossible to get hold of in any other way. He had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped inside and bought the book for two dollars fifty. At the time he was not conscious of wanting it for any particular purpose. He had carried it guiltily home in his briefcase. Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromising possession. \
The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary. This was not illegal (nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detected it was reasonably certain \
that it would be punished by death, or at least by twenty- five years in a forced-labour camp. Winston fitted a nib into the penholder and sucked it to get the grease off. The pen was an archaic instrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured one, furtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that the beautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib instead of being scratched with an ink-pencil. Actually he was not used to \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
writing by hand. Apart from very short notes, it was usu- al to dictate everything into the speak-write which was of course impossible for his present purpose. He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just a second. A trem- or had gone through his bowels. To mark the paper was the decisive act. In small clumsy letters he wrote: \
April 4th, 1984. \
He sat back. A sense of complete helplessness had de- scended upon him. To begin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984. It must be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age was thirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; but it was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two. \
For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this diary? For the future, for the unborn. His mind hovered for a moment round the doubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against the Newspeak word DOUBLETHINK. For the first time the magnitude of what he had undertaken came home to him. How could you communicate with the future? It was of its nature impossi- ble. Either the future would resemble the present, in which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from it, and his predicament would be meaningless. \
For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper. The telescreen had changed over to strident military music. It was curious that he seemed not merely to have lost the pow- \
10 1984 \
er of expressing himself, but even to have forgotten what it was that he had originally intended to say. For weeks past he had been making ready for this moment, and it had nev- er crossed his mind that anything would be needed except courage. The actual writing would be easy. All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminable restless mono- logue that had been running inside his head, literally for years. At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up. Moreover his varicose ulcer had begun itching unbearably. He dared not scratch it, because if he did so it always became inflamed. The seconds were ticking by. He was conscious of nothing except the blankness of the page in front of him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the music, and a slight booziness caused by the gin. \
Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imper- fectly aware of what he was setting down. His small but childish handwriting straggled up and down the page, shed- ding first its capital letters and finally even its full stops: \
April 4th, 1984. Last night to the flicks. All war films. One very good one of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean. Audience much amused\uc0\u8232 by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim away with\u8232 a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along\u8232 in the water like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights, then he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as suddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting with laughter \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
when he sank. then you saw a lifeboat full of children with a helicopter hovering over it. there was a middle-aged woman might have been a jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old in her arms. little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between her breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman putting her arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with fright herself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thought her arms could keep the bullets off him. then the helicopter planted a 20 kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwood. then there was a wonderful shot of a child\'92s arm going up up up right up into the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed it up and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down in the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shouting they didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it aint right not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned her out i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the proles say typical prole reaction they never\'97\'97 \
Winston stopped writing, partly because he was suffer- ing from cramp. He did not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the curious thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had clar- ified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal to writing it down. It was, he now realized, because of this other incident that he had suddenly decided to come \
1 1984 \
home and begin the diary today.\uc0\u8232 It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if any- \
thing so nebulous could be said to happen.\uc0\u8232 It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records De- \
partment, where Winston worked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping them in the cen- tre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation for the Two Minutes Hate. Winston was just taking his place in one of the middle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spoken to, came unexpectedly into the room. One of them was a girl whom he often passed in the corridors. He did not know her name, but he knew that she worked in the Fiction Department. Presumably\'97since he had sometimes seen her with oily hands and carrying a spanner\'97she had some mechanical job on one of the nov- el-writing machines. She was a bold-looking girl, of about twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athletic movements. A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, was wound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough to bring out the shapeliness of her hips. Winston had disliked her from the very first moment of seeing her. He knew the reason. It was because of the atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and general clean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her. He disliked nearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones. It was al- ways the women, and above all the young ones, who were the most bigoted adherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies and nosers-out of unortho- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
doxy. But this particular girl gave him the impression of being more dangerous than most. Once when they passed in the corridor she gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right into him and for a moment had filled him with black terror. The idea had even crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police. That, it was true, was very unlikely. Still, he continued to feel a pe- culiar uneasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenever she was anywhere near him. \
The other person was a man named O\'92Brien, a member of the Inner Party and holder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a dim idea of its nature. \
A momentary hush passed over the group of people round the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party member approaching. O\'92Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse, humorous, brutal face. In spite of his formidable appearance he had a certain charm of man- ner. He had a trick of resettling his spectacles on his nose which was curiously disarming\'97in some indefinable way, curiously civilized. It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in such terms, might have recalled an eigh- teenth-century nobleman offering his snuffbox. Winston had seen O\'92Brien perhaps a dozen times in almost as many years. He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intrigued by the contrast between O\'92Brien\'92s urbane manner and his prize-fighter\'92s physique. Much more it was because of a secretly held belief\'97or perhaps not even a be- lief, merely a hope\'97that O\'92Brien\'92s political orthodoxy was not perfect. Something in his face suggested it irresistibly. \
14 1984 \
And again, perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, but simply intelligence. But at any rate he had the appearance of being a person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen and get him alone. Winston had never made the smallest effort to verify this guess: indeed, there was no way of doing so. At this moment O\'92Brien glanced at his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidently decided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate was over. He took a chair in the same row as Winston, a couple of places away. A small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to Winston was between them. The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind. \
The next moment a hideous, grinding speech, as of some monstrous machine running without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room. It was a noise that set one\'92s teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the back of one\'92s neck. The Hate had started. \
As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, had flashed on to the screen. There were hisses here and there among the audience. The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and disgust. Gold- stein was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago (how long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leading figures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, and then had engaged in counter-revolu- tionary activities, had been condemned to death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared. The programmes of the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
none in which Goldstein was not the principal figure. He was the primal traitor, the earliest defiler of the Party\'92s pu- rity. All subsequent crimes against the Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviations, sprang directly out of his teaching. Somewhere or other he was still alive and hatching his conspiracies: perhaps somewhere beyond the sea, under the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even\'97so it was occasionally rumoured\'97in some hiding- place in Oceania itself. \
Winston\'92s diaphragm was constricted. He could never see the face of Goldstein without a painful mixture of emo- tions. It was a lean Jewish face, with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard\'97a clever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senile sil- liness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacles was perched. It resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had a sheep-like quality. Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attack upon the doctrines of the Party\'97an attack so exaggerated and perverse that a child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausible enough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, less level-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it. He was abusing Big Brother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demanding the imme- diate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedom of speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of as- sembly, freedom of thought, he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed\'97and all this in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of the ha- \
1 1984 \
bitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeak words: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normally use in real life. And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as to the reality which Goldstein\'92s specious claptrap covered, behind his head on the telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army\'97row after row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swam up to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by others exact- ly similar. The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers\'92 boots formed the background to Goldstein\'92s bleating voice. \
Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncon- trollable exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room. The self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying power of the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besides, the sight or even the thought of Goldstein produced fear and anger au- tomatically. He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasia or Eastasia, since when Oceania was at war with one of these Powers it was generally at peace with the other. But what was strange was that although Goldstein was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and a thousand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapers, in books, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to the general gaze for the pitiful rub- bish that they were\'97in spite of all this, his influence never seemed to grow less. Always there were fresh dupes waiting to be seduced by him. A day never passed when spies and saboteurs acting under his directions were not unmasked \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
by the Thought Police. He was the commander of a vast shadowy army, an underground network of conspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the State. The Brotherhood, its name was supposed to be. There were also whispered stories of a terrible book, a compendium of all the heresies, of which Goldstein was the author and which circulated clandestinely here and there. It was a book without a title. People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK. But one knew of such things only through vague rumours. Neither the Brotherhood nor THE BOOK was a subject that any or- dinary Party member would mention if there was a way of avoiding it. \
In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy. People were leaping up and down in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effort to drown the mad- dening bleating voice that came from the screen. The little sandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening and shutting like that of a landed fish. Even O\'92Brien\'92s heavy face was flushed. He was sitting very straight in his chair, his powerful chest swelling and quivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave. The dark-haired girl behind Winston had begun cry- ing out \'91Swine! Swine! Swine!\'92 and suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at the screen. It struck Goldstein\'92s nose and bounced off; the voice contin- ued inexorably. In a lucid moment Winston found that he was shouting with the others and kicking his heel violent- ly against the rung of his chair. The horrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to act \
18 1984 \
a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impossible to avoid joining in. Within thirty seconds any pretence was always unnecessary. A hideous ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire to kill, to torture, to smash faces in with a sledge- hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group of people like an electric current, turning one even against one\'92s will into a grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that one felt was an abstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one object to another like the flame of a blowlamp. Thus, at one moment Winston\'92s hatred was not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, against Big Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such moments his heart went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardian of truth and sanity in a world of lies. And yet the very next instant he was at one with the people about him, and all that was said of Goldstein seemed to him to be true. At those moments his secret loathing of Big Brother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed to tower up, an invincible, fearless protector, standing like a rock against the hordes of Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, his helplessness, and the doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like some sinister enchant- er, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the structure of civilization. \
It was even possible, at moments, to switch one\'92s ha- tred this way or that by a voluntary act. Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which one wrenches one\'92s head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeeded in transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
the dark-haired girl behind him. Vivid, beautiful hallucina- tions flashed through his mind. He would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon. He would tie her naked to a stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian. He would ravish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax. Bet- ter than before, moreover, he realized WHY it was that he hated her. He hated her because she was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed with her and would never do so, because round her sweet supple waist, which seemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there was only the odious scarlet sash, aggressive symbol of chas- tity. \
The Hate rose to its climax. The voice of Goldstein had become an actual sheep\'92s bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep. Then the sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemed to be advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, and seem- ing to spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some of the people in the front row actually flinched backwards in their seats. But in the same moment, drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, the hostile figure melted into the face of Big Brother, black-haired, black-moustachio\'92d, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that it almost filled up the screen. Nobody heard what Big Brother was saying. It was merely a few words of encouragement, the sort of words that are uttered in the din of battle, not distin- guishable individually but restoring confidence by the fact of being spoken. Then the face of Big Brother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stood out \
0 1984 \
in bold capitals: \
WAR IS PEACE\uc0\u8232 FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH \
But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for sever- al seconds on the screen, as though the impact that it had made on everyone\'92s eyeballs was too vivid to wear off im- mediately. The little sandy-haired woman had flung herself forward over the back of the chair in front of her. With a tremulous murmur that sounded like \'91My Saviour!\'92 she ex- tended her arms towards the screen. Then she buried her face in her hands. It was apparent that she was uttering a prayer. \
At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow, rhythmical chant of \'91B-B!...B-B!\'92\'97over and over again, very slowly, with a long pause between the first \'91B\'92 and the second\'97a heavy, murmurous sound, somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear the stamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom- toms. For perhaps as much as thirty seconds they kept it up. It was a refrain that was often heard in moments of overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom and majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis, a deliberate drowning of conscious- ness by means of rhythmic noise. Winston\'92s entrails seemed to grow cold. In the Two Minutes Hate he could not help sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chant- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
ing of \'91B-B!...B-B!\'92 always filled him with horror. Of course he chanted with the rest: it was impossible to do otherwise. To dissemble your feelings, to control your face, to do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctive reaction. But there was a space of a couple of seconds during which the expression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him. \
And it was exactly at this moment that the significant thing happened\'97if, indeed, it did happen. \
Momentarily he caught O\'92Brien\'92s eye. O\'92Brien had stood up. He had taken off his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose with his characteristic gesture. But there was a fraction of a second when their eyes met, and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew\'97yes, he KNEW!\'97that O\'92Brien was thinking the same thing as him- self. An unmistakable message had passed. It was as though their two minds had opened and the thoughts were flowing from one into the other through their eyes. \'91I am with you,\'92 O\'92Brien seemed to be saying to him. \'91I know precisely what you are feeling. I know all about your contempt, your ha- tred, your disgust. But don\'92t worry, I am on your side!\'92 And then the flash of intelligence was gone, and O\'92Brien\'92s face was as inscrutable as everybody else\'92s. \
That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had happened. Such incidents never had any sequel. All that they did was to keep alive in him the belief, or hope, that oth- ers besides himself were the enemies of the Party. Perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true after all\'97perhaps the Brotherhood really existed! It was impossible, in spite of the endless arrests and confessions \
 1984 \
and executions, to be sure that the Brotherhood was not simply a myth. Some days he believed in it, some days not. There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anything or nothing: snatches of overheard conver- sation, faint scribbles on lavatory walls\'97once, even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the hand which had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition. It was all guesswork: very likely he had imagined everything. \
He had gone back to his cubicle without looking at O\'92Brien again. The idea of following up their momentary contact hardly crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivably dangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it. For a second, two seconds, they had exchanged an equivo- cal glance, and that was the end of the story. But even that was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness in which one had to live. \
Winston roused himself and sat up straighter. He let out a belch. The gin was rising from his stomach. \
His eyes re-focused on the page. He discovered that while he sat helplessly musing he had also been writing, as though by automatic action. And it was no longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before. His pen had slid voluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat capitals\'97DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER \
over and over again, filling half a page. \
He could not help feeling a twinge of panic. It was ab- surd, since the writing of those particular words was not \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
more dangerous than the initial act of opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out the spoiled pages and abandon the enterprise altogether. \
He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless. Whether he wrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER, or whether he refrained from writing it, made no differ- ence. Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not go on with it, made no difference. The Thought Police would get him just the same. He had committed\'97would still have committed, even if he had never set pen to pa- per\'97the essential crime that contained all others in itself. \
Thoughtcrime, they called it. Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could be concealed for ever. You might dodge success- fully for a while, even for years, but sooner or later they were bound to get you. \
It was always at night\'97the arrests invariably happened at night. The sudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shak- ing your shoulder, the lights glaring in your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed. In the vast majority of cases there was no trial, no report of the arrest. People simply disap- peared, always during the night. Your name was removed from the registers, every record of everything you had ever done was wiped out, your one-time existence was denied and then forgotten. You were abolished, annihilated: VA- PORIZED was the usual word. \
For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria. He be- gan writing in a hurried untidy scrawl: \
theyll shoot me i don\'92t care theyll shoot me in the back of the \
4 1984 \
neck i dont care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of the neck i dont care down with big brother\'97\'97 \
He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid down the pen. The next moment he started violently. \
There was a knocking at the door.\uc0\u8232 Already! He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that \
whoever it was might go away after a single attempt. But no, the knocking was repeated. The worst thing of all would be to delay. His heart was thumping like a drum, but his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless. He got up and moved heavily towards the door. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
Chapter 2 \
\dn32 A\up0 s he put his hand to the door-knob Winston saw that he had left the diary open on the table. DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER was written all over it, in letters almost big \
enough to be legible across the room. It was an inconceiv- ably stupid thing to have done. But, he realized, even in his panic he had not wanted to smudge the creamy paper by shutting the book while the ink was wet. \
He drew in his breath and opened the door. Instantly a warm wave of relief flowed through him. A colourless, crushed-looking woman, with wispy hair and a lined face, was standing outside. \
\'91Oh, comrade,\'92 she began in a dreary, whining sort of voice, \'91I thought I heard you come in. Do you think you could come across and have a look at our kitchen sink? It\'92s got blocked up and\'97\'97\'92 \
It was Mrs Parsons, the wife of a neighbour on the same floor. (\'92Mrs\'92 was a word somewhat discountenanced by the Party\'97you were supposed to call everyone \'91comrade\'92\'97 but with some women one used it instinctively.) She was a woman of about thirty, but looking much older. One had the impression that there was dust in the creases of her face. Winston followed her down the passage. These amateur re- pair jobs were an almost daily irritation. Victory Mansions were old flats, built in 1930 or thereabouts, and were falling \
 1984 \
to pieces. The plaster flaked constantly from ceilings and walls, the pipes burst in every hard frost, the roof leaked whenever there was snow, the heating system was usually running at half steam when it was not closed down alto- gether from motives of economy. Repairs, except what you could do for yourself, had to be sanctioned by remote com- mittees which were liable to hold up even the mending of a window-pane for two years. \
\'91Of course it\'92s only because Tom isn\'92t home,\'92 said Mrs Parsons vaguely. \
The Parsons\'92 flat was bigger than Winston\'92s, and dingy in a different way. Everything had a battered, trampled-on look, as though the place had just been visited by some large violent animal. Games impedimenta\'97hockey-sticks, box- ing-gloves, a burst football, a pair of sweaty shorts turned inside out\'97lay all over the floor, and on the table there was a litter of dirty dishes and dog-eared exercise-books. On the walls were scarlet banners of the Youth League and the Spies, and a full-sized poster of Big Brother. There was the usual boiled-cabbage smell, common to the whole building, but it was shot through by a sharper reek of sweat, which\'97 one knew this at the first sniff, though it was hard to say how\'97was the sweat of some person not present at the mo- ment. In another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper was trying to keep tune with the military music which was still issuing from the telescreen. \
\'91It\'92s the children,\'92 said Mrs Parsons, casting a half-ap- prehensive glance at the door. \'91They haven\'92t been out today. \
And of course\'97\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
She had a habit of breaking off her sentences in the mid- dle. The kitchen sink was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelt worse than ever of cabbage. Winston knelt down and examined the angle-joint of the pipe. He hated using his hands, and he hated bending down, which was always liable to start him coughing. Mrs Parsons looked on helplessly. \
\'91Of course if Tom was home he\'92d put it right in a mo- ment,\'92 she said. \'91He loves anything like that. He\'92s ever so good with his hands, Tom is.\'92 \
Parsons was Winston\'92s fellow-employee at the Minis- try of Truth. He was a fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity, a mass of imbecile enthusiasms\'97one of those completely unquestioning, devoted drudges on whom, more even than on the Thought Police, the stability of the Party depended. At thirty-five he had just been unwilling- ly evicted from the Youth League, and before graduating into the Youth League he had managed to stay on in the Spies for a year beyond the statutory age. At the Ministry he was employed in some subordinate post for which in- telligence was not required, but on the other hand he was a leading figure on the Sports Committee and all the other committees engaged in organizing community hikes, spon- taneous demonstrations, savings campaigns, and voluntary activities generally. He would inform you with quiet pride, between whiffs of his pipe, that he had put in an appearance at the Community Centre every evening for the past four years. An overpowering smell of sweat, a sort of uncon- scious testimony to the strenuousness of his life, followed \
8 1984 \
him about wherever he went, and even remained behind him after he had gone. \
\'91Have you got a spanner?\'92 said Winston, fiddling with the nut on the angle-joint. \
\'91A spanner,\'92 said Mrs Parsons, immediately becoming invertebrate. \'91I don\'92t know, I\'92m sure. Perhaps the children\'97 \
\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 There was a trampling of boots and another blast on the \
comb as the children charged into the living-room. Mrs Parsons brought the spanner. Winston let out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human hair that had blocked up the pipe. He cleaned his fingers as best he could in the cold water from the tap and went back into the other room. \
\'91Up with your hands!\'92 yelled a savage voice. \
A handsome, tough-looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the table and was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol, while his small sister, about two years younger, made the same gesture with a fragment of wood. Both of them were dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirts, and red neckerchiefs which were the uniform of the Spies. Winston raised his hands above his head, but with an un- easy feeling, so vicious was the boy\'92s demeanour, that it was not altogether a game. \
\'91You\'92re a traitor!\'92 yelled the boy. \'91You\'92re a thought-crimi- nal! You\'92re a Eurasian spy! I\'92ll shoot you, I\'92ll vaporize you, I\'92ll send you to the salt mines!\'92 \
Suddenly they were both leaping round him, shouting \'91Traitor!\'92 and \'91Thought-criminal!\'92 the little girl imitating \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
her brother in every movement. It was somehow slightly frightening, like the gambolling of tiger cubs which will soon grow up into man-eaters. There was a sort of calculat- ing ferocity in the boy\'92s eye, a quite evident desire to hit or kick Winston and a consciousness of being very nearly big enough to do so. It was a good job it was not a real pistol he was holding, Winston thought. \
Mrs Parsons\'92 eyes flitted nervously from Winston to the children, and back again. In the better light of the living- room he noticed with interest that there actually was dust in the creases of her face. \
\'91They do get so noisy,\'92 she said. \'91They\'92re disappointed because they couldn\'92t go to see the hanging, that\'92s what it is. I\'92m too busy to take them. and Tom won\'92t be back from work in time.\'92 \
\'91Why can\'92t we go and see the hanging?\'92 roared the boy in his huge voice. \
\'91Want to see the hanging! Want to see the hanging!\'92 chanted the little girl, still capering round. \
Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes, were to be hanged in the Park that evening, Winston remembered. This happened about once a month, and was a popular spec- \
tacle. Children always clamoured to be taken to see it. He took his leave of Mrs Parsons and made for the door. But he had not gone six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck an agonizingly painful blow. It was as though a red-hot wire had been jabbed into him. He spun round just in time to see Mrs Parsons dragging her son back into the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult. \
0 1984 \
\'91Goldstein!\'92 bellowed the boy as the door closed on him. But what most struck Winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman\'92s greyish face. \
Back in the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at the table again, still rubbing his neck. The music from the telescreen had stopped. Instead, a clipped military voice was reading out, with a sort of brutal relish, a description of the armaments of the new Floating For- tress which had just been anchored between Iceland and the Faroe lslands. \
With those children, he thought, that wretched wom- an must lead a life of terror. Another year, two years, and they would be watching her night and day for symptoms of unorthodoxy. Nearly all children nowadays were horrible. \
What was worst of all was that by means of such organi- zations as the Spies they were systematically turned into ungovernable little savages, and yet this produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against the discipline of the Party. On the contrary, they adored the Party and every- thing connected with it. The songs, the processions, the banners, the hiking, the drilling with dummy rifles, the yelling of slogans, the worship of Big Brother\'97it was all a sort of glorious game to them. All their ferocity was turned outwards, against the enemies of the State, against foreign- ers, traitors, saboteurs, thought-criminals. It was almost normal for people over thirty to be frightened of their own children. And with good reason, for hardly a week passed in which \'91The Times\'92 did not carry a paragraph describing how some eavesdropping little sneak\'97\'92child hero\'92 was the \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
phrase generally used\'97had overheard some compromising remark and denounced its parents to the Thought Police. \
The sting of the catapult bullet had worn off. He picked up his pen half-heartedly, wondering whether he could find something more to write in the diary. Suddenly he began thinking of O\'92Brien again. \
Years ago\'97how long was it? Seven years it must be\'97he had dreamed that he was walking through a pitch-dark room. And someone sitting to one side of him had said as he passed: \'91We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness.\'92 It was said very quietly, almost casually\'97a state- ment, not a command. He had walked on without pausing. What was curious was that at the time, in the dream, the words had not made much impression on him. It was only later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on signifi- cance. He could not now remember whether it was before or after having the dream that he had seen O\'92Brien for the first time, nor could he remember when he had first identi- fied the voice as O\'92Brien\'92s. But at any rate the identification existed. It was O\'92Brien who had spoken to him out of the dark. \
Winston had never been able to feel sure\'97even after this morning\'92s flash of the eyes it was still impossible to be sure whether O\'92Brien was a friend or an enemy. Nor did it even seem to matter greatly. There was a link of understanding between them, more important than affection or partisan- ship. \'91We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,\'92 he had said. Winston did not know what it meant, only that in some way or another it would come true. \
 1984 \
The voice from the telescreen paused. A trumpet call, clear and beautiful, floated into the stagnant air. The voice continued raspingly: \
\'92Attention! Your attention, please! A newsflash has this moment arrived from the Malabar front. Our forces in South India have won a glorious victory. I am authorized to say\uc0\u8232 that the action we are now reporting may well bring the war within measurable distance of its end. Here is the newsflash\'97 \
\'97\'92 \
Bad news coming, thought Winston. And sure enough, following on a gory description of the annihilation of a Eurasian army, with stupendous figures of killed and pris- oners, came the announcement that, as from next week, the chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty. \
Winston belched again. The gin was wearing off, leaving a deflated feeling. The telescreen\'97perhaps to celebrate the victory, perhaps to drown the memory of the lost chocolate\'97 crashed into \'91Oceania, \'91tis for thee\'92. You were supposed to stand to attention. However, in his present position he was invisible. \
\'91Oceania, \'91tis for thee\'92 gave way to lighter music. Win- ston walked over to the window, keeping his back to the telescreen. The day was still cold and clear. Somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull, reverberating roar. About twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on London at present. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
Down in the street the wind flapped the torn poster to and fro, and the word INGSOC fitfully appeared and van- ished. Ingsoc. The sacred principles of Ingsoc. Newspeak, doublethink, the mutability of the past. He felt as though he were wandering in the forests of the sea bottom, lost in a monstrous world where he himself was the monster. He was alone. The past was dead, the future was unimaginable. \
What certainty had he that a single human creature now living was on his side? And what way of knowing that the dominion of the Party would not endure FOR EVER? Like an answer, the three slogans on the white face of the Minis- try of Truth came back to him: \
WAR IS PEACE\uc0\u8232 FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH \
He took a twenty-five cent piece out of his pocket. There, too, in tiny clear lettering, the same slogans were inscribed, and on the other face of the coin the head of Big Broth- er. Even from the coin the eyes pursued you. On coins, on stamps, on the covers of books, on banners, on posters, and on the wrappings of a cigarette packet\'97everywhere. Al- ways the eyes watching you and the voice enveloping you. \
Asleep or awake, working or eating, indoors or out of doors, in the bath or in bed\'97no escape. Nothing was your own ex- cept the few cubic centimetres inside your skull. \
The sun had shifted round, and the myriad windows of the Ministry of Truth, with the light no longer shining on \
4 1984 \
them, looked grim as the loopholes of a fortress. His heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape. It was too strong, it could not be stormed. A thousand rocket bombs would not batter it down. He wondered again for whom he was writing the diary. For the future, for the past\'97for an age that might be imaginary. And in front of him there lay not death but annihilation. The diary would be reduced to ashes and himself to vapour. Only the Thought Police would read what he had written, before they wiped it out of existence and out of memory. How could you make appeal to the future when not a trace of you, not even an anony- mous word scribbled on a piece of paper, could physically survive? \
The telescreen struck fourteen. He must leave in ten min- utes. He had to be back at work by fourteen-thirty. \
Curiously, the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into him. He was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear. But so long as he uttered it, in some obscure way the continuity was not broken. It was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried on the human heritage. He went back to the table, dipped his pen, and wrote: \
To the future or to the past, to a time when thought is\uc0\u8232 free, when men are different from one another and do not live alone\'97to a time when truth exists and what is done cannot be undone: From the age of uniformity, from the age of solitude, from the age of Big Brother, from the age of doublethink\'97greetings! \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
He was already dead, he reflected. It seemed to him that it was only now, when he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts, that he had taken the decisive step. The conse- quences of every act are included in the act itself. He wrote: \
Thoughtcrime does not entail death: thoughtcrime IS death. \
Now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became important to stay alive as long as possible. Two fingers of his right hand were inkstained. It was exactly the kind of detail that might betray you. Some nosing zealot in the Ministry (a woman, probably: someone like the little sandy-haired woman or the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Depart- ment) might start wondering why he had been writing during the lunch interval, why he had used an old-fash- ioned pen, WHAT he had been writing\'97and then drop a hint in the appropriate quarter. He went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbed the ink away with the gritty dark- brown soap which rasped your skin like sandpaper and was therefore well adapted for this purpose. \
He put the diary away in the drawer. It was quite useless to think of hiding it, but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence had been discovered. A hair laid across the page-ends was too obvious. With the tip of his finger he picked up an identifiable grain of whitish dust and depos- ited it on the corner of the cover, where it was bound to be shaken off if the book was moved. \
 1984 \
Chapter 3 \
\dn32 W\up0 inston was dreaming of his mother.\uc0\u8232 He must, he thought, have been ten or elev- en years old when his mother had disappeared. She was \
a tall, statuesque, rather silent woman with slow move- ments and magnificent fair hair. His father he remembered more vaguely as dark and thin, dressed always in neat dark clothes (Winston remembered especially the very thin soles of his father\'92s shoes) and wearing spectacles. The two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in one of the first great purges of the fifties. \
At this moment his mother was sitting in some place deep down beneath him, with his young sister in her arms. He did not remember his sister at all, except as a tiny, feeble baby, always silent, with large, watchful eyes. Both of them were looking up at him. They were down in some subter- ranean place\'97the bottom of a well, for instance, or a very deep grave\'97but it was a place which, already far below him, was itself moving downwards. They were in the saloon of a sinking ship, looking up at him through the darkening water. There was still air in the saloon, they could still see him and he them, but all the while they were sinking down, down into the green waters which in another moment must hide them from sight for ever. He was out in the light and air while they were being sucked down to death, and they \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
were down there because he was up here. He knew it and they knew it, and he could see the knowledge in their faces. There was no reproach either in their faces or in their hearts, only the knowledge that they must die in order that he might remain alive, and that this was part of the unavoid- \
able order of things.\uc0\u8232 He could not remember what had happened, but he knew \
in his dream that in some way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to his own. It was one of those dreams which, while retaining the characteristic dream scenery, are a continuation of one\'92s intellectual life, and in which one becomes aware of facts and ideas which still seem new and valuable after one is awake. The thing that now suddenly struck Winston was that his mother\'92s death, nearly thirty years ago, had been tragic and sorrowful in a way that was no longer possible. Tragedy, he perceived, be- longed to the ancient time, to a time when there was still privacy, love, and friendship, and when the members of a family stood by one another without needing to know the reason. His mother\'92s memory tore at his heart because she had died loving him, when he was too young and selfish to love her in return, and because somehow, he did not re- member how, she had sacrificed herself to a conception of loyalty that was private and unalterable. Such things, he saw, could not happen today. Today there were fear, hatred, and pain, but no dignity of emotion, no deep or complex sorrows. All this he seemed to see in the large eyes of his mother and his sister, looking up at him through the green water, hundreds of fathoms down and still sinking. \
8 1984 \
Suddenly he was standing on short springy turf, on a summer evening when the slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground. The landscape that he was looking at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certain whether or not he had seen it in the real world. In his wak- ing thoughts he called it the Golden Country. It was an old, rabbit-bitten pasture, with a foot-track wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the ragged hedge on the opposite side of the field the boughs of the elm trees were swaying very faintly in the breeze, their leaves just stirring in dense masses like women\'92s hair. Somewhere near at hand, though out of sight, there was a clear, slow-moving stream where dace were swimming in the pools under the willow trees. \
The girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field. With what seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung them disdainfully aside. Her body was white and smooth, but it aroused no desire in him, in- deed he barely looked at it. What overwhelmed him in that instant was admiration for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes aside. With its grace and carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture, a whole system of thought, as though Big Brother and the Party and the \
Thought Police could all be swept into nothingness by a sin- gle splendid movement of the arm. That too was a gesture belonging to the ancient time. Winston woke up with the word \'91Shakespeare\'92 on his lips. \
The telescreen was giving forth an ear-splitting whistle which continued on the same note for thirty seconds. It \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
was nought seven fifteen, getting-up time for office workers. Winston wrenched his body out of bed\'97naked, for a mem- ber of the Outer Party received only 3,000 clothing coupons annually, and a suit of pyjamas was 600\'97and seized a din- gy singlet and a pair of shorts that were lying across a chair. The Physical Jerks would begin in three minutes. The next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fit which nearly always attacked him soon after waking up. It emptied his lungs so completely that he could only begin breathing again by lying on his back and taking a series of deep gasps. His veins had swelled with the effort of the cough, and the varicose ulcer had started itching. \
\'91Thirty to forty group!\'92 yapped a piercing female voice. \'91Thirty to forty group! Take your places, please. Thirties to \
forties!\'92\uc0\u8232 Winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen, \
upon which the image of a youngish woman, scrawny but muscular, dressed in tunic and gym-shoes, had already ap- peared. \
\'91Arms bending and stretching!\'92 she rapped out. \'91Take your time by me. ONE, two, three, four! ONE, two, three, four! Come on, comrades, put a bit of life into it! ONE, two, three four! ONE two, three, four!...\'92 \
The pain of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of Winston\'92s mind the impression made by his dream, and the rhythmic movements of the exercise restored it somewhat. As he mechanically shot his arms back and forth, wearing on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was consid- \
ered proper during the Physical Jerks, he was struggling 40 1984 \
to think his way backward into the dim period of his early childhood. It was extraordinarily difficult. Beyond the late fifties everything faded. When there were no external re- cords that you could refer to, even the outline of your own life lost its sharpness. You remembered huge events which had quite probably not happened, you remembered the detail of incidents without being able to recapture their at- mosphere, and there were long blank periods to which you could assign nothing. Everything had been different then. Even the names of countries, and their shapes on the map, had been different. Airstrip One, for instance, had not been so called in those days: it had been called England or Brit- ain, though London, he felt fairly certain, had always been called London. \
Winston could not definitely remember a time when his country had not been at war, but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval of peace during his child- hood, because one of his early memories was of an air raid which appeared to take everyone by surprise. Perhaps it was the time when the atomic bomb had fallen on Colchester. He did not remember the raid itself, but he did remember his father\'92s hand clutching his own as they hurried down, down, down into some place deep in the earth, round and round a spiral staircase which rang under his feet and which finally so wearied his legs that he began whimpering and they had to stop and rest. His mother, in her slow, dreamy way, was following a long way behind them. She was car- rying his baby sister\'97or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankets that she was carrying: he was not certain whether \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 41 \
his sister had been born then. Finally they had emerged into a noisy, crowded place which he had realized to be a Tube station. \
There were people sitting all over the stone-flagged floor, and other people, packed tightly together, were sitting on metal bunks, one above the other. Winston and his mother and father found themselves a place on the floor, and near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by side on a bunk. The old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth cap pushed back from very white hair: his face was scarlet and his eyes were blue and full of tears. He reeked of gin. It seemed to breathe out of his skin in place of sweat, and one could have fancied that the tears welling from his eyes were pure gin. But though slightly drunk he was also suffering under some grief that was genuine and unbearable. In his childish way Winston grasped that some terrible thing, something that was beyond forgiveness and could never be remedied, had just happened. It also seemed to him that he knew what it was. Someone whom the old man loved\'97a little granddaughter, perhaps\'97had been killed. Every few minutes the old man kept repeating: \
\'92We didn\'92t ought to \'91ave trusted \'91em. I said so, Ma, didn\'92t I? That\'92s what comes of trusting \'91em. I said so all along. We didn\'92t ought to \'91ave trusted the buggers.\'92 \
But which buggers they didn\'92t ought to have trusted Winston could not now remember. \
Since about that time, war had been literally continu- 4 1984 \
ous, though strictly speaking it had not always been the same war. For several months during his childhood there had been confused street fighting in London itself, some of which he remembered vividly. But to trace out the history of the whole period, to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have been utterly impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever made mention of any other alignment than the existing one. At this mo- ment, for example, in 1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and in alliance with Eastasia. In no pub- lic or private utterance was it ever admitted that the three powers had at any time been grouped along different lines. Actually, as Winston well knew, it was only four years since Oceania had been at war with Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia. But that was merely a piece of furtive knowledge which he happened to possess because his memory was not satisfactorily under control. Officially the change of part- ners had never happened. Oceania was at war with Eurasia: therefore Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia. The enemy of the moment always represented absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future agreement with him was impossible. \
The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thou- sandth time as he forced his shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they were gyrating their bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to be good for the back muscles)\'97the frightening thing was that it might all be true. If the Party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event, IT NEVER HAPPENED\'97that, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
surely, was more terrifying than mere torture and death? The Party said that Oceania had never been in alliance with Eurasia. He, Winston Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as short a time as four years ago. But where did that knowledge exist? Only in his own \
consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated. And if all others accepted the lie which the Party imposed\'97 if all records told the same tale\'97then the lie passed into \
history and became truth. \'91Who controls the past,\'92 ran the Party slogan, \'91controls the future: who controls the present controls the past.\'92 And yet the past, though of its nature al- terable, never had been altered. Whatever was true now was true from everlasting to everlasting. It was quite simple. All that was needed was an unending series of victories over your own memory. \'91Reality control\'92, they called it: in New- speak, \'91doublethink\'92. \
\'91Stand easy!\'92 barked the instructress, a little more genial- \
ly.\uc0\u8232 Winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled \
his lungs with air. His mind slid away into the labyrin- thine world of doublethink. To know and not to know, to be conscious of complete truthfulness while telling care- fully constructed lies, to hold simultaneously two opinions which cancelled out, knowing them to be contradictory and believing in both of them, to use logic against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claim to it, to believe that democracy was impossible and that the Party was the guardian of democracy, to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, then to draw it back into memory again at the \
44 1984 \
moment when it was needed, and then promptly to forget it again: and above all, to apply the same process to the pro- cess itself. That was the ultimate subtlety: consciously to induce unconsciousness, and then, once again, to become unconscious of the act of hypnosis you had just performed. Even to understand the word \'91doublethink\'92 involved the use of doublethink. \
The instructress had called them to attention again. \'91And now let\'92s see which of us can touch our toes!\'92 she said en- thusiastically. \'91Right over from the hips, please, comrades. ONE-two! ONE-two!...\'92 \
Winston loathed this exercise, which sent shooting pains all the way from his heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughing fit. The half-pleasant qual- ity went out of his meditations. The past, he reflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed. For how could you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no record outside your own memory? He tried to remember in what year he had first heard mention of Big Brother. He thought it must have been at some time in the sixties, but it was impossible to be certain. In the Party histories, of course, Big Brother figured as the leader and guardian of the Revolution since its very earliest days. His exploits had been gradually pushed backwards in time until already they extended into the fabulous world of the forties and the thirties, when the capitalists in their strange cylin- drical hats still rode through the streets of London in great gleaming motor-cars or horse carriages with glass sides. \
There was no knowing how much of this legend was true Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
and how much invented. Winston could not even remem- ber at what date the Party itself had come into existence. He did not believe he had ever heard the word Ingsoc before 1960, but it was possible that in its Oldspeak form\'97\'92Eng- lish Socialism\'92, that is to say\'97it had been current earlier. Everything melted into mist. Sometimes, indeed, you could put your finger on a definite lie. It was not true, for example, as was claimed in the Party history books, that the Party had invented aeroplanes. He remembered aeroplanes since his earliest childhood. But you could prove nothing. There was never any evidence. Just once in his whole life he had held in his hands unmistakable documentary proof of the falsification of an historical fact. And on that occasion\'97\'97 \
\'91Smith!\'92 screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen. \'916079 Smith W.! Yes, YOU! Bend lower, please! You can do better than that. You\'92re not trying. Lower, please! THAT\'92S better, comrade. Now stand at ease, the whole squad, and \
watch me.\'92\uc0\u8232 A sudden hot sweat had broken out all over Winston\'92s \
body. His face remained completely inscrutable. Nev- er show dismay! Never show resentment! A single flicker of the eyes could give you away. He stood watching while the instructress raised her arms above her head and\'97one could not say gracefully, but with remarkable neatness and efficiency\'97bent over and tucked the first joint of her fin- gers under her toes. \
\'91THERE, comrades! THAT\'92S how I want to see you do- ing it. Watch me again. I\'92m thirty-nine and I\'92ve had four children. Now look.\'92 She bent over again. \'91You see MY \
4 1984 \
knees aren\'92t bent. You can all do it if you want to,\'92 she add- ed as she straightened herself up. \'91Anyone under forty-five is perfectly capable of touching his toes. We don\'92t all have the privilege of fighting in the front line, but at least we can all keep fit. Remember our boys on the Malabar front! And the sailors in the Floating Fortresses! Just think what THEY have to put up with. Now try again. That\'92s better, comrade, that\'92s MUCH better,\'92 she added encouragingly as Winston, with a violent lunge, succeeded in touching his toes with knees unbent, for the first time in several years. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
Chapter 4 \
\dn32 W\up0 ith the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the telescreen could prevent him from uttering when his day\'92s work started, Winston pulled the \
speakwrite towards him, blew the dust from its mouthpiece, and put on his spectacles. Then he unrolled and clipped together four small cylinders of paper which had already flopped out of the pneumatic tube on the right-hand side of his desk. \
In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices. To the right of the speakwrite, a small pneumatic tube for writ- ten messages, to the left, a larger one for newspapers; and in the side wall, within easy reach of Winston\'92s arm, a large oblong slit protected by a wire grating. This last was for the disposal of waste paper. Similar slits existed in thousands or tens of thousands throughout the building, not only in ev- ery room but at short intervals in every corridor. For some reason they were nicknamed memory holes. When one knew that any document was due for destruction, or even when one saw a scrap of waste paper lying about, it was an automatic action to lift the flap of the nearest memory hole and drop it in, whereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm air to the enormous furnaces which were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the building. \
Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had 48 1984 \
unrolled. Each contained a message of only one or two lines, in the abbreviated jargon\'97not actually Newspeak, but con- sisting largely of Newspeak words\'97which was used in the Ministry for internal purposes. They ran: \
times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify \
times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue\uc0\u8232 times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify \
times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling \
With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth message aside. It was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last. The other three were rou- tine matters, though the second one would probably mean some tedious wading through lists of figures. \
Winston dialled \'91back numbers\'92 on the telescreen and called for the appropriate issues of \'91The Times\'92, which slid out of the pneumatic tube after only a few minutes\'92 delay. \
The messages he had received referred to articles or news items which for one reason or another it was thought neces- sary to alter, or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify. For example, it appeared from \'91The Times\'92 of the seventeenth of March that Big Brother, in his speech of the previous day, had predicted that the South Indian front would re- main quiet but that a Eurasian offensive would shortly be \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 49 \
launched in North Africa. As it happened, the Eurasian Higher Command had launched its offensive in South In- dia and left North Africa alone. It was therefore necessary to rewrite a paragraph of Big Brother\'92s speech, in such a way as to make him predict the thing that had actually hap- pened. Or again, \'91The Times\'92 of the nineteenth of December had published the official forecasts of the output of various classes of consumption goods in the fourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth quarter of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. Today\'92s issue contained a statement of the actual out- put, from which it appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grossly wrong. Winston\'92s job was to rectify the original figures by making them agree with the later ones. As for the third message, it referred to a very simple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes. As short a time ago as February, the Ministry of Plenty had issued a promise (a \'91categorical pledge\'92 were the official words) that there would be no reduction of the chocolate ration during 1984. Actually, as Winston was aware, the chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty at the end of the present week. All that was needed was to substitute for the original promise a warning that it would probably be necessary to reduce the ration at some time in April. \
As soon as Winston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped his speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of \'91The Times\'92 and pushed them into the pneumatic tube. Then, with a movement which was as nearly as possi- ble unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notes that he himself had made, and dropped them into \
0 1984 \
the memory hole to be devoured by the flames.\uc0\u8232 What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, he did not know in detail, but he did know in general terms. As soon as all the corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular number of \'91The Times\'92 had been assembled and collated, that number would be reprinted, the original copy destroyed, and the corrected \
copy placed on the files in its stead. This process of con- tinuous alteration was applied not only to newspapers, but to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters, leaflets, films, sound-tracks, cartoons, photographs\'97to every kind of lit- erature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political or ideological significance. Day by day and almost minute by minute the past was brought up to date. In this way every prediction made by the Party could be shown by documentary evidence to have been correct, nor was any item of news, or any expression of opinion, which conflicted with the needs of the moment, ever allowed to remain on record. All history was a palimpsest, scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as was necessary. In no case would it have been possible, once the deed was done, to prove that any falsification had taken place. The largest section of the Records Department, far larger than the one on which Winston worked, consisted simply of persons whose duty it was to track down and collect all copies of books, newspapers, and other documents which had been superseded and were due for destruction. A number of \'91The Times\'92 which might, because of changes in political align- ment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Big Brother, have \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearing its original date, and no other copy existed to contradict it. Books, also, were recalled and rewritten again and again, and were invariably reissued without any admission that any alteration had been made. Even the written instruc- tions which Winston received, and which he invariably got rid of as soon as he had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an act of forgery was to be committed: always the reference was to slips, errors, misprints, or misquota- tions which it was necessary to put right in the interests of accuracy. \
But actually, he thought as he re-adjusted the Ministry of Plenty\'92s figures, it was not even forgery. It was merely the substitution of one piece of nonsense for another. Most of the material that you were dealing with had no connexion with anything in the real world, not even the kind of con- nexion that is contained in a direct lie. Statistics were just as much a fantasy in their original version as in their recti- fied version. A great deal of the time you were expected to make them up out of your head. For example, the Minis- try of Plenty\'92s forecast had estimated the output of boots for the quarter at 145 million pairs. The actual output was given as sixty-two millions. Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, marked the figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claim that the quota had been overfulfilled. In any case, sixty-two millions was no near- er the truth than fifty-seven millions, or than 145 millions. \
Very likely no boots had been produced at all. Likelier still, nobody knew how many had been produced, much less \
 1984 \
cared. All one knew was that every quarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on paper, while perhaps half the population of Oceania went barefoot. And so it was with every class of recorded fact, great or small. Everything faded away into a shadow-world in which, finally, even the date of the year had become uncertain. \
Winston glanced across the hall. In the corresponding cubicle on the other side a small, precise-looking, dark- chinned man named Tillotson was working steadily away, with a folded newspaper on his knee and his mouth very close to the mouthpiece of the speakwrite. He had the air of trying to keep what he was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen. He looked up, and his spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston\'92s direction. \
Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was employed on. People in the Records Depart- ment did not readily talk about their jobs. In the long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its end- less rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites, there were quite a dozen people whom Win- ston did not even know by name, though he daily saw them hurrying to and fro in the corridors or gesticulating in the Two Minutes Hate. He knew that in the cubicle next to him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in day out, sim- ply at tracking down and deleting from the Press the names of people who had been vaporized and were therefore con- sidered never to have existed. There was a certain fitness in this, since her own husband had been vaporized a couple of years earlier. And a few cubicles away a mild, ineffec- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
tual, dreamy creature named Ampleforth, with very hairy ears and a surprising talent for juggling with rhymes and metres, was engaged in producing garbled versions\'97defin- itive texts, they were called\'97of poems which had become ideologically offensive, but which for one reason or another were to be retained in the anthologies. And this hall, with its fifty workers or thereabouts, was only one sub-section, a single cell, as it were, in the huge complexity of the Records Department. Beyond, above, below, were other swarms of workers engaged in an unimaginable multitude of jobs. There were the huge printing-shops with their sub-editors, their typography experts, and their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs. There was the tele- programmes section with its engineers, its producers, and its teams of actors specially chosen for their skill in imitat- ing voices. There were the armies of reference clerks whose job was simply to draw up lists of books and periodicals which were due for recall. There were the vast repositories where the corrected documents were stored, and the hid- den furnaces where the original copies were destroyed. And somewhere or other, quite anonymous, there were the di- recting brains who co-ordinated the whole effort and laid down the lines of policy which made it necessary that this fragment of the past should be preserved, that one falsified, and the other rubbed out of existence. \
And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a single branch of the Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past but to supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbooks, telescreen \
4 1984 \
programmes, plays, novels\'97with every conceivable kind of information, instruction, or entertainment, from a statue to a slogan, from a lyric poem to a biological treatise, and from a child\'92s spelling-book to a Newspeak dictionary. And the Ministry had not only to supply the multifarious needs of the party, but also to repeat the whole operation at a lower level for the benefit of the proletariat. There was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletarian lit- erature, music, drama, and entertainment generally. Here were produced rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, crime and astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, and sentimen- tal songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on a special kind of kaleidoscope known as a ver- sificator. There was even a whole sub-section\'97Pornosec, it was called in Newspeak\'97engaged in producing the lowest kind of pornography, which was sent out in sealed packets and which no Party member, other than those who worked on it, was permitted to look at. \
Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was working, but they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them before the Two Minutes Hate in- terrupted him. When the Hate was over he returned to his cubicle, took the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed the speakwrite to one side, cleaned his spectacles, \
and settled down to his main job of the morning. Winston\'92s greatest pleasure in life was in his work. Most of it was a tedious routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and intricate that you could lose yourself in \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
them as in the depths of a mathematical problem\'97delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothing to guide you except your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and your estimate of what the Party wanted you to say. Winston was good at this kind of thing. On occasion he had even been entrusted with the rectification of \'91The Times\'92 leading arti- cles, which were written entirely in Newspeak. He unrolled the message that he had set aside earlier. It ran: \
times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling \
In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be ren- dered: \
The reporting of Big Brother\'92s Order for the Day in \'91The Times\'92 of December 3rd 1983 is extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to non-existent persons. Rewrite it in full and submit your draft to higher authority before filing. \
Winston read through the offending article. Big Broth- er\'92s Order for the Day, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an organization known as FFCC, which supplied cigarettes and other comforts to the sailors in the Floating Fortresses. A certain Comrade Withers, a prominent member of the Inner Party, had been singled out for special mention and awarded a decoration, the Order of Conspicuous Merit, Second Class. \
Three months later FFCC had suddenly been dissolved  1984 \
with no reasons given. One could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, but there had been no report of the matter in the Press or on the telescreen. That was to be expected, since it was unusual for political offend- ers to be put on trial or even publicly denounced. The great purges involving thousands of people, with public trials of traitors and thought-criminals who made abject confession of their crimes and were afterwards executed, were special show-pieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple of years. More commonly, people who had incurred the dis- pleasure of the Party simply disappeared and were never heard of again. One never had the smallest clue as to what had happened to them. In some cases they might not even be dead. Perhaps thirty people personally known to Win- ston, not counting his parents, had disappeared at one time or another. \
Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper-clip. In the cubicle across the way Comrade Tillotson was still crouch- ing secretively over his speakwrite. He raised his head for a moment: again the hostile spectacle-flash. Winston won- dered whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged on the same job as himself. It was perfectly possible. So tricky a piece of work would never be entrusted to a single person: on the other hand, to turn it over to a committee would be to ad- mit openly that an act of fabrication was taking place. Very likely as many as a dozen people were now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had actually said. And presently some master brain in the Inner Party would se- lect this version or that, would re-edit it and set in motion \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
the complex processes of cross-referencing that would be required, and then the chosen lie would pass into the per- manent records and become truth. \
Winston did not know why Withers had been disgraced. Perhaps it was for corruption or incompetence. Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of a too-popular subordi- nate. Perhaps Withers or someone close to him had been suspected of heretical tendencies. Or perhaps\'97what was likeliest of all\'97the thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a necessary part of the me- chanics of government. The only real clue lay in the words \
\'91refs unpersons\'92, which indicated that Withers was already dead. You could not invariably assume this to be the case when people were arrested. Sometimes they were released and allowed to remain at liberty for as much as a year or two years before being executed. Very occasionally some person whom you had believed dead long since would make a ghostly reappearance at some public trial where he would implicate hundreds of others by his testimony before van- ishing, this time for ever. Withers, however, was already an UNPERSON. He did not exist: he had never existed. Win- ston decided that it would not be enough simply to reverse the tendency of Big Brother\'92s speech. It was better to make it deal with something totally unconnected with its origi- nal subject. \
He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and thought-criminals, but that was a little too ob- vious, while to invent a victory at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninth Three-Year Plan, might \
8 1984 \
complicate the records too much. What was needed was a piece of pure fantasy. Suddenly there sprang into his mind, ready made as it were, the image of a certain Comrade Ogil- vy, who had recently died in battle, in heroic circumstances. \
There were occasions when Big Brother devoted his Order for the Day to commemorating some humble, rank-and-file Party member whose life and death he held up as an exam- ple worthy to be followed. Today he should commemorate Comrade Ogilvy. It was true that there was no such person as Comrade Ogilvy, but a few lines of print and a couple of faked photographs would soon bring him into existence. \
Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speak- write towards him and began dictating in Big Brother\'92s familiar style: a style at once military and pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and then promptly answering them (\'92What lessons do we learn from this fact, comrades? The lesson\'97which is also one of the fundamen- tal principles of Ingsoc\'97that,\'92 etc., etc.), easy to imitate. \
At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, a sub-machine gun, and a model helicopter. At six\'97a year early, by a special relaxation of the rules\'97he \
had joined the Spies, at nine he had been a troop leader. At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Police after overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal tendencies. At seventeen he had been a dis- trict organizer of the Junior Anti-Sex League. At nineteen he had designed a hand-grenade which had been adopted by the Ministry of Peace and which, at its first trial, had killed thirty-one Eurasian prisoners in one burst. At twen- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
ty-three he had perished in action. Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over the Indian Ocean with important despatches, he had weighted his body with his machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatches and all\'97an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to contemplate without feelings of envy. Big Brother added a few remarks on the purity and single-mindedness of Com- rade Ogilvy\'92s life. He was a total abstainer and a nonsmoker, had no recreations except a daily hour in the gymnasium, and had taken a vow of celibacy, believing marriage and the care of a family to be incompatible with a twenty-four-hour- a-day devotion to duty. He had no subjects of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, and no aim in life except the defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-down of spies, saboteurs, thoughtcriminals, and traitors generally. \
Winston debated with himself whether to award Com- rade Ogilvy the Order of Conspicuous Merit: in the end he decided against it because of the unnecessary cross-refer- encing that it would entail. \
Once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle. Something seemed to tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same job as himself. There was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adopted, but he felt a profound conviction that it would be his own. Comrade Ogilvy, unimagined an hour ago, was now a fact. It struck him as curious that you could create dead men but not liv- ing ones. Comrade Ogilvy, who had never existed in the present, now existed in the past, and when once the act of forgery was forgotten, he would exist just as authentical- \
0 1984 \
ly, and upon the same evidence, as Charlemagne or Julius Caesar. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
Chapter 5 \
\dn32 I\up0 n the low-ceilinged canteen, deep underground, the lunch queue jerked slowly forward. The room was al- ready very full and deafeningly noisy. From the grille at the \
counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a sour metallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gin. On the far side of the room there was a small bar, a mere hole in the wall, where gin could be bought at \
ten cents the large nip.\uc0\u8232 \'91Just the man I was looking for,\'92 said a voice at Winston\'92s \
back.\uc0\u8232 He turned round. It was his friend Syme, who worked in \
the Research Department. Perhaps \'91friend\'92 was not exact- ly the right word. You did not have friends nowadays, you had comrades: but there were some comrades whose society was pleasanter than that of others. Syme was a philologist, a specialist in Newspeak. Indeed, he was one of the enormous team of experts now engaged in compiling the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary. He was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large, protuber- ant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to search your face closely while he was speaking to you. \
\'91I wanted to ask you whether you\'92d got any razor blades,\'92 he said. \
\'91Not one!\'92 said Winston with a sort of guilty haste. \'91I\'92ve  1984 \
tried all over the place. They don\'92t exist any longer.\'92 Everyone kept asking you for razor blades. Actually he had two unused ones which he was hoarding up. There had been a famine of them for months past. At any given \
moment there was some necessary article which the Par- ty shops were unable to supply. Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was darning wool, sometimes it was shoelaces; at present it was razor blades. You could only get hold of them, if at all, by scrounging more or less furtively on the \
\'91free\'92 market.\uc0\u8232 \'91I\'92ve been using the same blade for six weeks,\'92 he added \
untruthfully.\uc0\u8232 The queue gave another jerk forward. As they halted he \
turned and faced Syme again. Each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the end of the counter. \
\'91Did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday?\'92 said Syme. \
\'91I was working,\'92 said Winston indifferently. \'91I shall see it on the flicks, I suppose.\'92 \
\'91A very inadequate substitute,\'92 said Syme.\uc0\u8232 His mocking eyes roved over Winston\'92s face. \'91I know \
you,\'92 the eyes seemed to say, \'91I see through you. I know very well why you didn\'92t go to see those prisoners hanged.\'92 In an intellectual way, Syme was venomously orthodox. He would talk with a disagreeable gloating satisfaction of he- licopter raids on enemy villages, and trials and confessions of thought-criminals, the executions in the cellars of the Ministry of Love. Talking to him was largely a matter of getting him away from such subjects and entangling him, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
if possible, in the technicalities of Newspeak, on which he was authoritative and interesting. Winston turned his head a little aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark eyes. \
\'91It was a good hanging,\'92 said Syme reminiscently. \'91I think it spoils it when they tie their feet together. I like to see them kicking. And above all, at the end, the tongue sticking right out, and blue\'97a quite bright blue. That\'92s the detail that ap- peals to me.\'92 \
\'91Nex\'92, please!\'92 yelled the white-aproned prole with the la- dle. \
Winston and Syme pushed their trays beneath the grille. On to each was dumped swiftly the regulation lunch\'97a metal pannikin of pinkish-grey stew, a hunk of bread, a cube of cheese, a mug of milkless Victory Coffee, and one saccharine tablet. \
\'91There\'92s a table over there, under that telescreen,\'92 said Syme. \'91Let\'92s pick up a gin on the way.\'92 \
The gin was served out to them in handleless china mugs. They threaded their way across the crowded room and un- \
packed their trays on to the metal-topped table, on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew, a filthy liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit. Winston took up his mug of gin, paused for an instant to collect his nerve, and gulped the oily-tasting stuff down. When he had winked the tears out of his eyes he suddenly discov- ered that he was hungry. He began swallowing spoonfuls of the stew, which, in among its general sloppiness, had cubes of spongy pinkish stuff which was probably a preparation of meat. Neither of them spoke again till they had emptied \
4 1984 \
their pannikins. From the table at Winston\'92s left, a little behind his back, someone was talking rapidly and contin- uously, a harsh gabble almost like the quacking of a duck, which pierced the general uproar of the room. \
\'91How is the Dictionary getting on?\'92 said Winston, raising his voice to overcome the noise. \
\'91Slowly,\'92 said Syme. \'91I\'92m on the adjectives. It\'92s fascinat- ing.\'92 \
He had brightened up immediately at the mention of Newspeak. He pushed his pannikin aside, took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and his cheese in the other, and leaned across the table so as to be able to speak without shouting. \
\'91The Eleventh Edition is the definitive edition,\'92 he said. \'91We\'92re getting the language into its final shape\'97the shape it\'92s going to have when nobody speaks anything else. When we\'92ve finished with it, people like you will have to learn it all over again. You think, I dare say, that our chief job is inventing new words. But not a bit of it! We\'92re destroying words\'97scores of them, hundreds of them, every day. We\'92re \
cutting the language down to the bone. The Eleventh Edi- tion won\'92t contain a single word that will become obsolete before the year 2050.\'92 \
He bit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, then continued speaking, with a sort of ped- ant\'92s passion. His thin dark face had become animated, his eyes had lost their mocking expression and grown almost dreamy. \
\'91It\'92s a beautiful thing, the destruction of words. Of course Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
the great wastage is in the verbs and adjectives, but there are hundreds of nouns that can be got rid of as well. It isn\'92t only the synonyms; there are also the antonyms. After all, what justification is there for a word which is simply the opposite of some other word? A word contains its opposite in itself. Take \'91good\'92, for instance. If you have a word like \'91good\'92, what need is there for a word like \'91bad\'92? \'91Ungood\'92 will do just as well\'97better, because it\'92s an exact opposite, which the other is not. Or again, if you want a stronger ver- sion of \'91good\'92, what sense is there in having a whole string of vague useless words like \'91excellent\'92 and \'91splendid\'92 and all the rest of them? \'91Plusgood\'92 covers the meaning, or \'91double- plusgood\'92 if you want something stronger still. Of course we use those forms already. but in the final version of New- speak there\'92ll be nothing else. In the end the whole notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six words\'97 in reality, only one word. Don\'92t you see the beauty of that, Winston? It was B.B.\'92s idea originally, of course,\'92 he added as an afterthought. \
A sort of vapid eagerness flitted across Winston\'92s face at the mention of Big Brother. Nevertheless Syme immediately detected a certain lack of enthusiasm. \
\'91You haven\'92t a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,\'92 he said almost sadly. \'91Even when you write it you\'92re still thinking in Oldspeak. I\'92ve read some of those pieces that you write in \'91The Times\'92 occasionally. They\'92re good enough, but they\'92re translations. In your heart you\'92d prefer to stick to Oldspeak, with all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaning. You don\'92t grasp the beauty of the destruction of \
 1984 \
words. Do you know that Newspeak is the only language in the world whose vocabulary gets smaller every year?\'92 \
Winston did know that, of course. He smiled, sympa- thetically he hoped, not trusting himself to speak. Syme bit off another fragment of the dark-coloured bread, chewed it briefly, and went on: \
\'91Don\'92t you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought? In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because there will be no words in which to express it. Every concept that can ever be needed, will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaning rigidly defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten. Already, in the Eleventh Edition, we\'92re not far from that point. But the process will still be continuing long after you and I are dead. Every year fewer and fewer words, and the range of consciousness always a little smaller. Even now, of course, there\'92s no reason or ex- cuse for committing thoughtcrime. It\'92s merely a question of self-discipline, reality-control. But in the end there won\'92t be any need even for that. The Revolution will be com- plete when the language is perfect. Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak,\'92 he added with a sort of mystical satis- faction. \'91Has it ever occurred to you, Winston, that by the year 2050, at the very latest, not a single human being will be alive who could understand such a conversation as we are having now?\'92 \
\'91Except\'97\'97\'92 began Winston doubtfully, and he stopped. It had been on the tip of his tongue to say \'91Except the proles,\'92 but he checked himself, not feeling fully certain that \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
this remark was not in some way unorthodox. Syme, how- ever, had divined what he was about to say. \
\'91The proles are not human beings,\'92 he said carelessly. \'91By 2050\'97earlier, probably\'97all real knowledge of Oldspeak will have disappeared. The whole literature of the past will have been destroyed. Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, By- ron\'97they\'92ll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changed into something different, but actually changed into something contradictory of what they used to be. Even the literature of the Party will change. Even the slogans will change. How could you have a slogan like \'91freedom is slav- ery\'92 when the concept of freedom has been abolished? The whole climate of thought will be different. In fact there will be no thought, as we understand it now. Orthodoxy means not thinking\'97not needing to think. Orthodoxy is uncon- sciousness.\'92 \
One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep conviction, Syme will be vaporized. He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks too plainly. The Party does not like such people. One day he will disappear. It is written in his face. \
Winston had finished his bread and cheese. He turned a little sideways in his chair to drink his mug of coffee. At the table on his left the man with the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away. A young woman who was perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her back to Winston, was listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with everything that he said. From time to time \
Winston caught some such remark as \'91I think you\'92re so right, 8 1984 \
I do so agree with you\'92, uttered in a youthful and rather silly feminine voice. But the other voice never stopped for an in- stant, even when the girl was speaking. Winston knew the man by sight, though he knew no more about him than that he held some important post in the Fiction Department. He was a man of about thirty, with a muscular throat and a large, mobile mouth. His head was thrown back a little, and because of the angle at which he was sitting, his spectacles caught the light and presented to Winston two blank discs instead of eyes. What was slightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound that poured out of his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word. Just once Winston caught a phrase\'97\'92complete and final elimination of Goldsteinism\'92\'97jerked out very rapidly and, as it seemed, all in one piece, like a line of type cast solid. For the rest it was just a noise, a quack-quack-quacking. And yet, though you could not actually hear what the man was saying, you could not be in any doubt about its general nature. He might be denouncing Goldstein and demanding sterner measures against thought-criminals and saboteurs, he might be ful- minating against the atrocities of the Eurasian army, he might be praising Big Brother or the heroes on the Malabar front\'97it made no difference. Whatever it was, you could be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsoc. As he watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rapidly up and down, Winston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being but some kind of dummy. It was not the man\'92s brain that was speaking, it was his larynx. \
The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words, but Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
it was not speech in the true sense: it was a noise uttered in unconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck. \
Syme had fallen silent for a moment, and with the han- dle of his spoon was tracing patterns in the puddle of stew. The voice from the other table quacked rapidly on, easily \
audible in spite of the surrounding din.\uc0\u8232 \'91There is a word in Newspeak,\'92 said Syme, \'91I don\'92t know \
whether you know it: DUCKSPEAK, to quack like a duck. It is one of those interesting words that have two contradic- tory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it is abuse, applied to someone you agree with, it is praise.\'92 \
Unquestionably Syme will be vaporized, Winston thought again. He thought it with a kind of sadness, al- though well knowing that Syme despised him and slightly disliked him, and was fully capable of denouncing him as a thought-criminal if he saw any reason for doing so. There was something subtly wrong with Syme. There was some- thing that he lacked: discretion, aloofness, a sort of saving stupidity. You could not say that he was unorthodox. He be- lieved in the principles of Ingsoc, he venerated Big Brother, he rejoiced over victories, he hated heretics, not merely with sincerity but with a sort of restless zeal, an up-to-dateness of information, which the ordinary Party member did not approach. Yet a faint air of disreputability always clung to him. He said things that would have been better unsaid, he had read too many books, he frequented the Chestnut Tree Cafe, haunt of painters and musicians. There was no law, not even an unwritten law, against frequenting the Chest- nut Tree Cafe, yet the place was somehow ill-omened. The \
0 1984 \
old, discredited leaders of the Party had been used to gather there before they were finally purged. Goldstein himself, it was said, had sometimes been seen there, years and decades ago. Syme\'92s fate was not difficult to foresee. And yet it was a fact that if Syme grasped, even for three seconds, the na- ture of his, Winston\'92s, secret opinions, he would betray him instantly to the Thought Police. So would anybody else, for that matter: but Syme more than most. Zeal was not enough. Orthodoxy was unconsciousness. \
Syme looked up. \'91Here comes Parsons,\'92 he said. \
Something in the tone of his voice seemed to add, \'91that bloody fool\'92. Parsons, Winston\'92s fellow-tenant at Victory Mansions, was in fact threading his way across the room\'97 a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and a froglike face. \
At thirty-five he was already putting on rolls of fat at neck and waistline, but his movements were brisk and boyish. His whole appearance was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that although he was wearing the regulation over- alls, it was almost impossible not to think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirt, and red neckerchief of the Spies. In visualizing him one saw always a picture of dimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy fore- arms. Parsons did, indeed, invariably revert to shorts when a community hike or any other physical activity gave him an excuse for doing so. He greeted them both with a cheery \'91Hullo, hullo!\'92 and sat down at the table, giving off an in- tense smell of sweat. Beads of moisture stood out all over his pink face. His powers of sweating were extraordinary. \
At the Community Centre you could always tell when he Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
had been playing table-tennis by the dampness of the bat handle. Syme had produced a strip of paper on which there was a long column of words, and was studying it with an ink-pencil between his fingers. \
\'91Look at him working away in the lunch hour,\'92 said Par- sons, nudging Winston. \'91Keenness, eh? What\'92s that you\'92ve got there, old boy? Something a bit too brainy for me, I ex- pect. Smith, old boy, I\'92ll tell you why I\'92m chasing you. It\'92s that sub you forgot to give me.\'92 \
\'91Which sub is that?\'92 said Winston, automatically feel- ing for money. About a quarter of one\'92s salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions, which were so nu- merous that it was difficult to keep track of them. \
\'91For Hate Week. You know\'97the house-by-house fund. I\'92m treasurer for our block. We\'92re making an all-out effort\'97 going to put on a tremendous show. I tell you, it won\'92t be my fault if old Victory Mansions doesn\'92t have the biggest outfit of flags in the whole street. Two dollars you promised me.\'92 \
Winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes, which Parsons entered in a small notebook, in the neat handwriting of the illiterate. \
\'91By the way, old boy,\'92 he said. \'91I hear that little beggar of mine let fly at you with his catapult yesterday. I gave him a good dressing-down for it. In fact I told him I\'92d take the catapult away if he does it again.\'92 \
\'91I think he was a little upset at not going to the execution,\'92 said Winston. \
\'91Ah, well\'97what I mean to say, shows the right spirit, doesn\'92t it? Mischievous little beggars they are, both of them, \
 1984 \
but talk about keenness! All they think about is the Spies, and the war, of course. D\'92you know what that little girl of mine did last Saturday, when her troop was on a hike out Berkhamsted way? She got two other girls to go with her, slipped off from the hike, and spent the whole afternoon following a strange man. They kept on his tail for two hours, right through the woods, and then, when they got into Am- ersham, handed him over to the patrols.\'92 \
\'91What did they do that for?\'92 said Winston, somewhat tak- en aback. Parsons went on triumphantly: \
\'91My kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent\'97 might have been dropped by parachute, for instance. But here\'92s the point, old boy. What do you think put her on to him in the first place? She spotted he was wearing a funny kind of shoes\'97said she\'92d never seen anyone wearing shoes like that before. So the chances were he was a foreigner. Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh?\'92 \
\'91What happened to the man?\'92 said Winston. \
\'91Ah, that I couldn\'92t say, of course. But I wouldn\'92t be alto- gether surprised if\'97\'97\'92 Parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle, and clicked his tongue for the explosion. \
\'91Good,\'92 said Syme abstractedly, without looking up from his strip of paper. \
\'91Of course we can\'92t afford to take chances,\'92 agreed Win- ston dutifully. \
\'91What I mean to say, there is a war on,\'92 said Parsons. \
As though in confirmation of this, a trumpet call float- ed from the telescreen just above their heads. However, it was not the proclamation of a military victory this time, but \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
merely an announcement from the Ministry of Plenty. \'91Comrades!\'92 cried an eager youthful voice. \'91Attention, \
comrades! We have glorious news for you. We have won the battle for production! Returns now completed of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that the standard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the past year. All over Oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneous demonstrations when workers marched out of factories and offices and paraded through the streets with banners voicing their gratitude to Big Brother for the new, happy life which his wise leadership has bestowed upon us. Here are some of the completed figures. Foodstuffs\'97\'97\'92 \
The phrase \'91our new, happy life\'92 recurred several times. It had been a favourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty. Par- sons, his attention caught by the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity, a sort of edified boredom. He could not follow the figures, but he was aware that they were in some way a cause for satisfaction. He had lugged out a huge and filthy pipe which was already half full of charred tobacco. With the tobacco ration at 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible to fill a pipe to the top. Winston was smoking a Victory Cigarette which he held carefully hori- zontal. The new ration did not start till tomorrow and he had only four cigarettes left. For the moment he had shut his ears to the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff that streamed out of the telescreen. It appeared that there had even been demonstrations to thank Big Brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty grammes a week. And only yesterday, he reflected, it had been announced that the ra- \
4 1984 \
tion was to be REDUCED to twenty grammes a week. Was it possible that they could swallow that, after only twenty-four hours? Yes, they swallowed it. Parsons swallowed it easily, with the stupidity of an animal. The eyeless creature at the other table swallowed it fanatically, passionately, with a fu- rious desire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest that last week the ration had been thirty grammes. Syme, too\'97in some more complex way, involv- ing doublethink, Syme swallowed it. Was he, then, ALONE in the possession of a memory? \
The fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the tele- screen. As compared with last year there was more food, more clothes, more houses, more furniture, more cook- ing-pots, more fuel, more ships, more helicopters, more books, more babies\'97more of everything except disease, crime, and insanity. Year by year and minute by minute, everybody and everything was whizzing rapidly upwards. \
As Syme had done earlier Winston had taken up his spoon and was dabbling in the pale-coloured gravy that dribbled across the table, drawing a long streak of it out into a pat- tern. He meditated resentfully on the physical texture of life. Had it always been like this? Had food always tasted like this? He looked round the canteen. A low-ceilinged, crowded room, its walls grimy from the contact of innu- merable bodies; battered metal tables and chairs, placed so close together that you sat with elbows touching; bent spoons, dented trays, coarse white mugs; all surfaces greasy, grime in every crack; and a sourish, composite smell of bad gin and bad coffee and metallic stew and dirty clothes. Al- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
ways in your stomach and in your skin there was a sort of protest, a feeling that you had been cheated of something that you had a right to. It was true that he had no memories of anything greatly different. In any time that he could ac- curately remember, there had never been quite enough to eat, one had never had socks or underclothes that were not full of holes, furniture had always been battered and rickety, rooms underheated, tube trains crowded, houses falling to pieces, bread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, coffee filthy-tast- ing, cigarettes insufficient\'97nothing cheap and plentiful except synthetic gin. And though, of course, it grew worse as one\'92s body aged, was it not a sign that this was NOT the natural order of things, if one\'92s heart sickened at the dis- comfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickiness of one\'92s socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the gritty soap, the cigarettes that came to piec- es, the food with its strange evil tastes? Why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kind of ancestral memory that things had once been different? \
He looked round the canteen again. Nearly everyone was ugly, and would still have been ugly even if dressed other- wise than in the uniform blue overalls. On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a small, curiously beetle-like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyes darting sus- picious glances from side to side. How easy it was, thought Winston, if you did not look about you, to believe that the physical type set up by the Party as an ideal\'97tall muscu- lar youths and deep-bosomed maidens, blond-haired, vital, sunburnt, carefree\'97existed and even predominated. Ac- \
 1984 \
tually, so far as he could judge, the majority of people in Airstrip One were small, dark, and ill-favoured. It was curi- ous how that beetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries: little dumpy men, growing stout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling movements, and fat inscrutable faces with very small eyes. It was the type that seemed to \
flourish best under the dominion of the Party.\uc0\u8232 The announcement from the Ministry of Plenty ended \
on another trumpet call and gave way to tinny music. Par- sons, stirred to vague enthusiasm by the bombardment of figures, took his pipe out of his mouth. \
\'91The Ministry of Plenty\'92s certainly done a good job this year,\'92 he said with a knowing shake of his head. \'91By the way, Smith old boy, I suppose you haven\'92t got any razor blades you can let me have?\'92 \
\'91Not one,\'92 said Winston. \'91I\'92ve been using the same blade for six weeks myself.\'92 \
\'91Ah, well\'97just thought I\'92d ask you, old boy.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Sorry,\'92 said Winston.\u8232 The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily si- \
lenced during the Ministry\'92s announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever. For some reason Winston suddenly found himself thinking of Mrs Parsons, with her wispy hair and the dust in the creases of her face. Within two years those children would be denouncing her to the Thought Police. Mrs Parsons would be vaporized. Syme would be vaporized. Winston would be vaporized. O\'92Brien would be vaporized. Parsons, on the other hand, would never be vaporized. The eyeless creature with the quacking voice \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
would never be vaporized. The little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine corridors of Ministries they, too, would never be vaporized. And the girl with dark hair, the girl from the Fiction Department\'97she would never be vaporized either. It seemed to him that he knew instinctively who would survive and who would per- ish: though just what it was that made for survival, it was not easy to say. \
At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk. The girl at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him. It was the girl with dark hair. She was looking at him in a sidelong way, but with curious intensity. The instant she caught his eye she looked away again. \
The sweat started out on Winston\'92s backbone. A horri- ble pang of terror went through him. It was gone almost at once, but it left a sort of nagging uneasiness behind. Why was she watching him? Why did she keep following him about? Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been at the table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards. But yesterday, at any rate, during the Two Minutes Hate, she had sat immediately behind him when there was no apparent need to do so. Quite likely her real object had been to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough. \
His earlier thought returned to him: probably she was not actually a member of the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was the greatest danger of all. He did not know how long she had been looking at \
8 1984 \
him, but perhaps for as much as five minutes, and it was possible that his features had not been perfectly under con- trol. It was terribly dangerous to let your thoughts wander when you were in any public place or within range of a tele- screen. The smallest thing could give you away. A nervous tic, an unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering to yourself\'97anything that carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, of having something to hide. In any case, to wear an improper expression on your face (to look incredu- lous when a victory was announced, for example) was itself a punishable offence. There was even a word for it in New- speak: FACECRIME, it was called. \
The girl had turned her back on him again. Perhaps after all she was not really following him about, perhaps it was coincidence that she had sat so close to him two days run- ning. His cigarette had gone out, and he laid it carefully on the edge of the table. He would finish smoking it after work, if he could keep the tobacco in it. Quite likely the person at the next table was a spy of the Thought Police, and quite likely he would be in the cellars of the Ministry of Love within three days, but a cigarette end must not be wasted. Syme had folded up his strip of paper and stowed it away in his pocket. Parsons had begun talking again. \
\'91Did I ever tell you, old boy,\'92 he said, chuckling round the stem of his pipe, \'91about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the old market-woman\'92s skirt because they saw her wrapping up sausages in a poster of B.B.? Sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of match- es. Burned her quite badly, I believe. Little beggars, eh? But \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
keen as mustard! That\'92s a first-rate training they give them in the Spies nowadays\'97better than in my day, even. What d\'92you think\'92s the latest thing they\'92ve served them out with? Ear trumpets for listening through keyholes! My little girl brought one home the other night\'97tried it out on our sit- ting-room door, and reckoned she could hear twice as much as with her ear to the hole. Of course it\'92s only a toy, mind you. Still, gives \'91em the right idea, eh?\'92 \
At this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle. It was the signal to return to work. All three men sprang to their feet to join in the struggle round the lifts, and the re- maining tobacco fell out of Winston\'92s cigarette. \
80 1984 \
Chapter 6 \
\dn32 W\up0 inston was writing in his diary: \
It was three years ago. It was on a dark evening, in a narrow side-street near one of the big railway stations. She was standing near a doorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave any light. She had a young face, painted very thick. It was really the paint that appealed to me, the whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips. Party women never paint their faces. There was nobody else in the street, and no telescreens. She said two dollars. I\'97\'97 \
For the moment it was too difficult to go on. He shut his eyes and pressed his fingers against them, trying to squeeze out the vision that kept recurring. He had an almost over- whelming temptation to shout a string of filthy words at the top of his voice. Or to bang his head against the wall, to kick over the table, and hurl the inkpot through the window\'97to do any violent or noisy or painful thing that might black out the memory that was tormenting him. \
Your worst enemy, he reflected, was your own nervous system. At any moment the tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visible symptom. He thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weeks back; a quite ordinary-looking man, a Party member, aged thir- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 81 \
ty-five to forty, tallish and thin, carrying a brief-case. They were a few metres apart when the left side of the man\'92s face was suddenly contorted by a sort of spasm. It happened again just as they were passing one another: it was only a twitch, a quiver, rapid as the clicking of a camera shutter, but obviously habitual. He remembered thinking at the time: That poor devil is done for. And what was frighten- ing was that the action was quite possibly unconscious. The most deadly danger of all was talking in your sleep. There was no way of guarding against that, so far as he could see. \
He drew his breath and went on writing: \
I went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into a basement kitchen. There was a bed against the wall, and a lamp on the table, turned down very low. She\'97\'97 \
His teeth were set on edge. He would have liked to spit. Simultaneously with the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of Katharine, his wife. Winston was married\'97 had been married, at any rate: probably he still was married, so far as he knew his wife was not dead. He seemed to breathe again the warm stuffy odour of the basement kitch- en, an odour compounded of bugs and dirty clothes and villainous cheap scent, but nevertheless alluring, because no woman of the Party ever used scent, or could be imag- ined as doing so. Only the proles used scent. In his mind the smell of it was inextricably mixed up with fornication. \
When he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two years or thereabouts. Consorting with prosti- \
8 1984 \
tutes was forbidden, of course, but it was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to break. It was dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter. To be caught with a prostitute might mean five years in a forced- labour camp: not more, if you had committed no other offence. And it was easy enough, provided that you could avoid being caught in the act. The poorer quarters swarmed with women who were ready to sell themselves. Some could even be purchased for a bottle of gin, which the proles were not supposed to drink. Tacitly the Party was even inclined to encourage prostitution, as an outlet for instincts which could not be altogether suppressed. Mere debauchery did not matter very much, so long as it was furtive and joyless and only involved the women of a submerged and despised class. The unforgivable crime was promiscuity between Party members. But\'97though this was one of the crimes that the accused in the great purges invariably confessed to\'97it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually hap- pening. \
The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forming loyalties which it might not be able to control. Its real, undeclared purpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act. Not love so much as eroti- cism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it. All marriages between Party members had to be approved by a committee appointed for the purpose, and\'97though the principle was never clearly stated\'97permission was al- ways refused if the couple concerned gave the impression of being physically attracted to one another. The only rec- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
ognized purpose of marriage was to beget children for the service of the Party. Sexual intercourse was to be looked on as a slightly disgusting minor operation, like having an en- ema. This again was never put into plain words, but in an indirect way it was rubbed into every Party member from childhood onwards. There were even organizations such as the Junior Anti-Sex League, which advocated complete celibacy for both sexes. All children were to be begotten by artificial insemination (ARTSEM, it was called in New- speak) and brought up in public institutions. This, Winston was aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but some- how it fitted in with the general ideology of the Party. The Party was trying to kill the sex instinct, or, if it could not be killed, then to distort it and dirty it. He did not know why this was so, but it seemed natural that it should be so. And as far as the women were concerned, the Party\'92s efforts were largely successful. \
He thought again of Katharine. It must be nine, ten\'97 nearly eleven years since they had parted. It was curious how seldom he thought of her. For days at a time he was ca- pable of forgetting that he had ever been married. They had only been together for about fifteen months. The Party did not permit divorce, but it rather encouraged separation in cases where there were no children. \
Katharine was a tall, fair-haired girl, very straight, with splendid movements. She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have called noble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing behind it. Very early in her married life he had decided\'97though perhaps it was \
84 1984 \
only that he knew her more intimately than he knew most people\'97that she had without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that he had ever encountered. She had not a thought in her head that was not a slogan, and there was no imbecility, absolutely none that she was not capable of swallowing if the Party handed it out to her. \'91The hu- man sound-track\'92 he nicknamed her in his own mind. Yet he could have endured living with her if it had not been for just one thing\'97sex. \
As soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiff- en. To embrace her was like embracing a jointed wooden image. And what was strange was that even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she was si- multaneously pushing him away with all her strength. The rigidlty of her muscles managed to convey that impres- sion. She would lie there with shut eyes, neither resisting nor co-operating but SUBMITTING. It was extraordinari- ly embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible. But even then he could have borne living with her if it had been agreed that they should remain celibate. But curiously enough it was Katharine who refused this. They must, she said, pro- duce a child if they could. So the performance continued to happen, once a week quite regulariy, whenever it was not impossible. She even used to remind him of it in the morn- ing, as something which had to be done that evening and which must not be forgotten. She had two names for it. One was \'91making a baby\'92, and the other was \'91our duty to the Par- ty\'92 (yes, she had actually used that phrase). Quite soon he grew to have a feeling of positive dread when the appointed \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
day came round. But luckily no child appeared, and in the end she agreed to give up trying, and soon afterwards they parted. \
Winston sighed inaudibly. He picked up his pen again and wrote: \
She threw herself down on the bed, and at once, without any kind of preliminary in the most coarse, horrible way you can imagine, pulled up her skirt. I\'97\'97 \
He saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight, with the smell of bugs and cheap scent in his nostrils, and in his heart a feeling of defeat and resentment which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought of Kath- arine\'92s white body, frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the Party. Why did it always have to be like this? Why could he not have a woman of his own instead of these filthy scuffles at intervals of years? But a real love affair was an al- most unthinkable event. The women of the Party were all alike. Chastity was as deep ingrained in them as Party loy- alty. By careful early conditioning, by games and cold water, by the rubbish that was dinned into them at school and in the Spies and the Youth League, by lectures, parades, songs, slogans, and martial music, the natural feeling had been driven out of them. His reason told him that there must be exceptions, but his heart did not believe it. They were all im- pregnable, as the Party intended that they should be. And what he wanted, more even than to be loved, was to break down that wall of virtue, even if it were only once in his \
8 1984 \
whole life. The sexual act, successfully performed, was re- bellion. Desire was thoughtcrime. Even to have awakened Katharine, if he could have achieved it, would have been like a seduction, although she was his wife. \
But the rest of the story had got to be written down. He wrote: \
I turned up the lamp. When I saw her in the light\'97\'97 \
After the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed very bright. For the first time he could see the woman properly. He had taken a step towards her and then halted, full of lust and terror. He was painfully conscious of the risk he had taken in coming here. It was perfectly pos- sible that the patrols would catch him on the way out: for that matter they might be waiting outside the door at this moment. If he went away without even doing what he had come here to do\'97\'97! \
It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed. What he had suddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was OLD. The paint was plastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might crack like a cardboard mask. There were streaks of white in her hair; but the truly dreadful detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open, revealing nothing except a cavernous blackness. She had no teeth at all. \
He wrote hurriedly, in scrabbling handwriting: \
When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman, fifty \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
years old at least. But I went ahead and did it just the same. \
He pressed his fingers against his eyelids again. He had written it down at last, but it made no difference. The thera- py had not worked. The urge to shout filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever. \
88 1984 \
Chapter 7 \
\dn32 \'91\up0 If there is hope,\'92 wrote Winston, \'91it lies in the proles.\'92\uc0\u8232 If there was hope, it MUST lie in the proles, because only there in those swarming disregarded masses, 85 per \
cent of the population of Oceania, could the force to de- stroy the Party ever be generated. The Party could not be overthrown from within. Its enemies, if it had any enemies, had no way of coming together or even of identifying one another. Even if the legendary Brotherhood existed, as just possibly it might, it was inconceivable that its members could ever assemble in larger numbers than twos and threes. Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inflexion of the voice, at the most, an occasional whispered word. But the proles, if only they could somehow become conscious of their own strength. would have no need to conspire. They needed only to rise up and shake themselves like a horse shaking off flies. If they chose they could blow the Party to pieces tomorrow morning. Surely sooner or later it must occur to them to do it? And yet\'97\'97! \
He remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when a tremendous shout of hundreds of voices women\'92s voices\'97had burst from a side-street a little way ahead. It was a great formidable cry of anger and de- spair, a deep, loud \'91Oh-o-o-o-oh!\'92 that went humming on like the reverberation of a bell. His heart had leapt. It\'92s start- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 89 \
ed! he had thought. A riot! The proles are breaking loose at last! When he had reached the spot it was to see a mob of two or three hundred women crowding round the stalls of a street market, with faces as tragic as though they had been the doomed passengers on a sinking ship. But at this moment the general despair broke down into a multitude of individual quarrels. It appeared that one of the stalls had been selling tin saucepans. They were wretched, flimsy things, but cooking-pots of any kind were always difficult to get. Now the supply had unexpectedly given out. The successful women, bumped and jostled by the rest, were trying to make off with their saucepans while dozens of others clamoured round the stall, accusing the stall-keeper of favouritism and of having more saucepans somewhere in reserve. There was a fresh outburst of yells. Two bloat- ed women, one of them with her hair coming down, had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear it out of one another\'92s hands. For a moment they were both tugging, and then the handle came off. Winston watched them disgustedly. And yet, just for a moment, what almost frightening power had sounded in that cry from only a few hundred throats! Why was it that they could never shout like that about anything that mattered? \
He wrote: \
Until they become conscious they will never rebel, and until after they have rebelled they cannot become conscious. \
That, he reflected, might almost have been a transcrip- 90 1984 \
tion from one of the Party textbooks. The Party claimed, of course, to have liberated the proles from bondage. Before the Revolution they had been hideously oppressed by the capitalists, they had been starved and flogged, women had been forced to work in the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mines, as a matter of fact), children had been sold into the factories at the age of six. But simultaneous- ly, true to the Principles of doublethink, the Party taught that the proles were natural inferiors who must be kept in subjection, like animals, by the application of a few simple rules. In reality very little was known about the proles. It was not necessary to know much. So long as they contin- ued to work and breed, their other activities were without importance. Left to themselves, like cattle turned loose upon the plains of Argentina, they had reverted to a style of life that appeared to be natural to them, a sort of ancestral pattern. They were born, they grew up in the gutters, they went to work at twelve, they passed through a brief blos- soming-period of beauty and sexual desire, they married at twenty, they were middle-aged at thirty, they died, for the most part, at sixty. Heavy physical work, the care of home and children, petty quarrels with neighbours, films, foot- ball, beer, and above all, gambling, filled up the horizon of their minds. To keep them in control was not difficult. A few agents of the Thought Police moved always among them, spreading false rumours and marking down and eliminating the few individuals who were judged capable of becoming dangerous; but no attempt was made to indoctri- nate them with the ideology of the Party. It was not desirable \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 91 \
that the proles should have strong political feelings. All that was required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed to whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working-hours or shorter rations. And even when they became discontented, as they sometimes did, their discontent led nowhere, because being without general ideas, they could only focus it on petty specific grievances. The larger evils invariably escaped their notice. The great majority of proles did not even have telescreens in their homes. Even the civil police interfered with them very little. There was a vast amount of criminality in London, a whole world-within-a-world of thieves, bandits, prostitutes, drug-peddlers, and racketeers of every description; but since it all happened among the proles themselves, it was of no importance. In all questions of morals they were al- lowed to follow their ancestral code. The sexual puritanism of the Party was not imposed upon them. Promiscuity went unpunished, divorce was permitted. For that matter, even religious worship would have been permitted if the proles had shown any sign of needing or wanting it. They were beneath suspicion. As the Party slogan put it: \'91Proles and animals are free.\'92 \
Winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer. It had begun itching again. The thing you invariably came back to was the impossibility of knowing what life before the Revolution had really been like. He took out of the drawer a copy of a children\'92s history textbook which he had borrowed from Mrs Parsons, and began copy- ing a passage into the diary: \
9 1984 \
In the old days (it ran), before the glorious Revolution, London was not the beautiful city that we know today. It\uc0\u8232 was a dark, dirty, miserable place where hardly anybody\u8232 had enough to eat and where hundreds and thousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to sleep under. Children no older than you had to work twelve hours a day for cruel masters who flogged them with whips\u8232 if they worked too slowly and fed them on nothing but stale breadcrusts and water. But in among all this terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful houses that were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to look after them. These rich men were called capitalists. They were fat, ugly men with wicked faces, like the one in the picture on the opposite page. You can see that he is dressed in a long black coat which was called a frock coat, and a queer, shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe, which was called a top hat. This was the uniform of the capitalists, and no one else was allowed to wear it. The capitalists owned everything in the world, and everyone else was their slave. They owned all the land, all the houses, all the factories, and all the money. If anyone disobeyed them they could throw them into prison, or they could take his job away and starve him to death. When any ordinary person spoke to a capitalist he had to cringe and bow to him, and take off his cap and address him as \'91Sir\'92. The chief of all the capitalists was called the King, and\'97\'97 \
But he knew the rest of the catalogue. There would be mention of the bishops in their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, the pillory, the stocks, the treadmill, the \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
cat-o\'92-nine tails, the Lord Mayor\'92s Banquet, and the prac- tice of kissing the Pope\'92s toe. There was also something called the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, which would probably not be mentioned in a textbook for children. It was the law by which every capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in one of his factories. \
How could you tell how much of it was lies? It MIGHT be true that the average human being was better off now than he had been before the Revolution. The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were in- tolerable and that at some other time they must have been different. It struck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was not its cruelty and insecurity, but simply its bareness, its dinginess, its listlessness. Life, if you looked about you, bore no resemblance not only to the lies that streamed out of the telescreens, but even to the ideals that the Party was trying to achieve. Great areas of it, even for a Party member, were neutral and non-political, a mat- ter of slogging through dreary jobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadging a saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end. The ideal set up by the Par- ty was something huge, terrible, and glittering\'97a world of steel and concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons\'97a nation of warriors and fanatics, marching for- ward in perfect unity, all thinking the same thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting, triumphing, persecuting\'97three hundred million people all with the same face. The reality was decaying, dingy cities \
94 1984 \
where underfed people shuffled to and fro in leaky shoes, in patched-up nineteenth-century houses that smelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories. He seemed to see a vision of London, vast and ruinous, city of a million dustbins, and mixed up with it was a picture of Mrs Parsons, a woman with lined face and wispy hair, fiddling helplessly with a blocked waste-pipe. \
He reached down and scratched his ankle again. Day and night the telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today had more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations\'97that they lived longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, stronger, hap- pier, more intelligent, better educated, than the people of fifty years ago. Not a word of it could ever be proved or dis- proved. The Party claimed, for example, that today 40 per cent of adult proles were literate: before the Revolution, it was said, the number had only been 15 per cent. The Party claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only 160 per thousand, whereas before the Revolution it had been 300\'97 and so it went on. It was like a single equation with two unknowns. It might very well be that literally every word in the history books, even the things that one accepted with- out question, was pure fantasy. For all he knew there might never have been any such law as the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, or any such creature as a capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat. \
Everything faded into mist. The past was erased, the era- sure was forgotten, the lie became truth. Just once in his life he had possessed\'97AFTER the event: that was what \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
counted\'97concrete, unmistakable evidence of an act of fal- sification. He had held it between his fingers for as long as thirty seconds. In 1973, it must have been\'97at any rate, it was at about the time when he and Katharine had parted. But the really relevant date was seven or eight years earlier. \
The story really began in the middle sixties, the period of the great purges in which the original leaders of the Revolu- tion were wiped out once and for all. By 1970 none of them was left, except Big Brother himself. All the rest had by that time been exposed as traitors and counter-revolutionar- ies. Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one knew where, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majority had been executed after spectacular public trials at which they made confession of their crimes. Among the last survivors were three men named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. It must have been in 1965 that these three had been arrested. As often happened, they had vanished for a year or more, so that one did not know whether they were alive or dead, and then had suddenly been brought forth to incriminate themselves in the usual way. They had con- fessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, too, the enemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public funds, the murder of various trusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brother which had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sabotage causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people. After confess- ing to these things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and given posts which were in fact sinecures but which sounded important. All three had written long, ab- \
9 1984 \
ject articles in \'91The Times\'92, analysing the reasons for their defection and promising to make amends. \
Some time after their release Winston had actually seen all three of them in the Chestnut Tree Cafe. He remembered the sort of terrified fascination with which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye. They were men far old- er than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last great figures left over from the heroic days of the Party. The glamour of the underground struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them. He had the feeling, though already at that time facts and dates were growing blurry, that he had known their names years earlier than he had known that of Big Brother. But also they were outlaws, enemies, untouch- ables, doomed with absolute certainty to extinction within a year or two. No one who had once fallen into the hands of the Thought Police ever escaped in the end. They were corpses waiting to be sent back to the grave. \
There was no one at any of the tables nearest to them. It was not wise even to be seen in the neighbourhood of such people. They were sitting in silence before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was the speciality of the cafe. Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearance had most impressed Winston. Rutherford had once been a famous caricaturist, whose brutal cartoons had helped to inflame popular opinion before and during the Revolution. Even now, at long intervals, his cartoons were appearing in The Times. They were simply an imitation of his earlier manner, and curiously lifeless and unconvincing. Always they were a rehashing of the ancient themes\'97slum tenements, starv- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
ing children, street battles, capitalists in top hats\'97even on the barricades the capitalists still seemed to cling to their top hats an endless, hopeless effort to get back into the past. He was a monstrous man, with a mane of greasy grey hair, his face pouched and seamed, with thick negroid lips. At one time he must have been immensely strong; now his great body was sagging, sloping, bulging, falling away in every direction. He seemed to be breaking up before one\'92s eyes, like a mountain crumbling. \
It was the lonely hour of fifteen. Winston could not now remember how he had come to be in the cafe at such a time. The place was almost empty. A tinny music was trickling from the telescreens. The three men sat in their corner almost motionless, never speaking. Uncommanded, the waiter brought fresh glasses of gin. There was a chess- board on the table beside them, with the pieces set out but no game started. And then, for perhaps half a minute in all, something happened to the telescreens. The tune that they were playing changed, and the tone of the music changed too. There came into it\'97but it was something hard to de- scribe. It was a peculiar, cracked, braying, jeering note: in his mind Winston called it a yellow note. And then a voice from the telescreen was singing: \
98 \
1984 \
Under the spreading chestnut tree I sold you and you sold me:\uc0\u8232 There lie they, and here lie we Under the spreading chestnut tree. \
The three men never stirred. But when Winston glanced again at Rutherford\'92s ruinous face, he saw that his eyes were full of tears. And for the first time he noticed, with a kind of inward shudder, and yet not knowing AT WHAT he shuddered, that both Aaronson and Rutherford had bro- ken noses. \
A little later all three were re-arrested. It appeared that they had engaged in fresh conspiracies from the very mo- ment of their release. At their second trial they confessed to all their old crimes over again, with a whole string of new ones. They were executed, and their fate was recorded in the Party histories, a warning to posterity. About five years after this, in 1973, Winston was unrolling a wad of docu- ments which had just flopped out of the pneumatic tube on to his desk when he came on a fragment of paper which had evidently been slipped in among the others and then forgotten. The instant he had flattened it out he saw its sig- nificance. It was a half-page torn out of \'91The Times\'92 of about ten years earlier\'97the top half of the page, so that it included the date\'97and it contained a photograph of the delegates at some Party function in New York. Prominent in the middle of the group were Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. There was no mistaking them, in any case their names were in the caption at the bottom. \
The point was that at both trials all three men had con- fessed that on that date they had been on Eurasian soil. They had flown from a secret airfield in Canada to a rendezvous somewhere in Siberia, and had conferred with members of the Eurasian General Staff, to whom they had betrayed im- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 99 \
portant military secrets. The date had stuck in Winston\'92s memory because it chanced to be midsummer day; but the whole story must be on record in countless other places as well. There was only one possible conclusion: the confes- sions were lies. \
Of course, this was not in itself a discovery. Even at that time Winston had not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges had actually committed the crimes that they were accused of. But this was concrete evidence; it was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossil bone which turns up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geo- logical theory. It was enough to blow the Party to atoms, if in some way it could have been published to the world and its significance made known. \
He had gone straight on working. As soon as he saw what the photograph was, and what it meant, he had covered it up with another sheet of paper. Luckily, when he unrolled it, it had been upside-down from the point of view of the telescreen. \
He took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair so as to get as far away from the telescreen as pos- sible. To keep your face expressionless was not difficult, and even your breathing could be controlled, with an effort: but you could not control the beating of your heart, and the telescreen was quite delicate enough to pick it up. He let what he judged to be ten minutes go by, tormented all the while by the fear that some accident\'97a sudden draught blowing across his desk, for instance\'97would betray him. \
Then, without uncovering it again, he dropped the photo- 100 1984 \
graph into the memory hole, along with some other waste papers. Within another minute, perhaps, it would have crumbled into ashes. \
That was ten\'97eleven years ago. Today, probably, he would have kept that photograph. It was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingers seemed to him to make a difference even now, when the photograph itself, as well as the event it recorded, was only memory. Was the Party\'92s hold upon the past less strong, he wondered, because a piece of evidence which existed no longer HAD ONCE existed? \
But today, supposing that it could be somehow resur- rected from its ashes, the photograph might not even be evidence. Already, at the time when he made his discov- ery, Oceania was no longer at war with Eurasia, and it must have been to the agents of Eastasia that the three dead men had betrayed their country. Since then there had been oth- er changes\'97two, three, he could not remember how many. \
Very likely the confessions had been rewritten and rewritten until the original facts and dates no longer had the small- est significance. The past not only changed, but changed continuously. What most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was that he had never clearly understood why the huge imposture was undertaken. The immediate advan- tages of falsifying the past were obvious, but the ultimate motive was mysterious. He took up his pen again and wrote: \
I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 101 \
He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself was a lunatic. Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one. At one time it had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun; today, to believe that the past is inalterable. He might be ALONE in holding that belief, and if alone, then a lunatic. But the thought of being a lunatic did not greatly trouble him: the horror was that he might also be wrong. \
He picked up the children\'92s history book and looked at the portrait of Big Brother which formed its frontispiece. The hypnotic eyes gazed into his own. It was as though \
some huge force were pressing down upon you\'97something that penetrated inside your skull, battering against your brain, frightening you out of your beliefs, persuading you, almost, to deny the evidence of your senses. In the end the Party would announce that two and two made five, and you would have to believe it. It was inevitable that they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of their position demanded it. Not merely the validity of experience, but the very existence of external reality, was tacitly denied by their philosophy. The heresy of heresies was common sense. And what was terrifying was not that they would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they might be right. For, after all, how do we know that two and two make four? Or that the force of gravity works? Or that the past is unchange- able? If both the past and the external world exist only in the mind, and if the mind itself is controllable what then? \
But no! His courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord. The face of O\'92Brien, not called up by any obvi- \
10 1984 \
ous association, had floated into his mind. He knew, with more certainty than before, that O\'92Brien was on his side. He was writing the diary for O\'92Brien\'97TO O\'92Brien: it was like an interminable letter which no one would ever read, but which was addressed to a particular person and took its colour from that fact. \
The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears. It was their final, most essential command. His heart sank as he thought of the enormous power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Party intellectual would over- throw him in debate, the subtle arguments which he would not be able to understand, much less answer. And yet he was in the right! They were wrong and he was right. The obvious, the silly, and the true had got to be defended. Tru- isms are true, hold on to that! The solid world exists, its laws do not change. Stones are hard, water is wet, objects unsup- ported fall towards the earth\'92s centre. With the feeling that he was speaking to O\'92Brien, and also that he was setting forth an important axiom, he wrote: \
Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four. If that is granted, all else follows. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 10 \
Chapter 8 \
\dn32 F\up0 rom somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roasting coffee\'97real coffee, not Victory Coffee\'97came floating out into the street. Winston paused involuntarily. \
For perhaps two seconds he was back in the half-forgotten world of his childhood. Then a door banged, seeming to cut off the smell as abruptly as though it had been a sound. \
He had walked several kilometres over pavements, and his varicose ulcer was throbbing. This was the second time in three weeks that he had missed an evening at the Com- munity Centre: a rash act, since you could be certain that the number of your attendances at the Centre was care- fully checked. In principle a Party member had no spare time, and was never alone except in bed. It was assumed that when he was not working, eating, or sleeping he would be taking part in some kind of communal recreation: to do anything that suggested a taste for solitude, even to go for a walk by yourself, was always slightly dangerous. There was a word for it in Newspeak: OWNLIFE, it was called, mean- ing individualism and eccentricity. But this evening as he came out of the Ministry the balminess of the April air had tempted him. The sky was a warmer blue than he had seen it that year, and suddenly the long, noisy evening at the Cen- tre, the boring, exhausting games, the lectures, the creaking camaraderie oiled by gin, had seemed intolerable. On im- \
104 1984 \
pulse he had turned away from the bus-stop and wandered off into the labyrinth of London, first south, then east, then north again, losing himself among unknown streets and hardly bothering in which direction he was going. \
\'91If there is hope,\'92 he had written in the diary, \'91it lies in the proles.\'92 The words kept coming back to him, statement of a mystical truth and a palpable absurdity. He was some- where in the vague, brown-coloured slums to the north and east of what had once been Saint Pancras Station. He was walking up a cobbled street of little two-storey houses with battered doorways which gave straight on the pavement and which were somehow curiously suggestive of ratholes. \
There were puddles of filthy water here and there among the cobbles. In and out of the dark doorways, and down narrow alley-ways that branched off on either side, people swarmed in astonishing numbers\'97girls in full bloom, with crude- ly lipsticked mouths, and youths who chased the girls, and swollen waddling women who showed you what the girls would be like in ten years\'92 time, and old bent creatures shuf- fling along on splayed feet, and ragged barefooted children who played in the puddles and then scattered at angry yells from their mothers. Perhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were broken and boarded up. Most of the people paid no attention to Winston; a few eyed him with a sort of guarded curiosity. Two monstrous women with brick-red forearms folded across thelr aprons were talking outside a doorway. Winston caught scraps of conversation as he ap- proached. \
\'91\'92Yes,\'92 I says to \'91er, \'91that\'92s all very well,\'92 I says. \'91But if you\'92d Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 10 \
of been in my place you\'92d of done the same as what I done. It\'92s easy to criticize,\'92 I says, \'91but you ain\'92t got the same prob- lems as what I got.\'91\'91 \
\'91Ah,\'92 said the other, \'91that\'92s jest it. That\'92s jest where it is.\'92 \
The strident voices stopped abruptly. The women stud- ied him in hostile silence as he went past. But it was not hostility, exactly; merely a kind of wariness, a momentary stiffening, as at the passing of some unfamiliar animal. The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight in a street like this. Indeed, it was unwise to be seen in such places, unless you had definite business there. The patrols might stop you if you happened to run into them. \'91May I see your papers, comrade? What are you doing here? What time did you leave work? Is this your usual way home?\'92\'97and so on and so forth. Not that there was any rule against walking home by an unusual route: but it was enough to draw atten- tion to you if the Thought Police heard about it. \
Suddenly the whole street was in commotion. There were yells of warning from all sides. People were shooting into the doorways like rabbits. A young woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of Winston, grabbed up a tiny child playing in a puddle, whipped her apron round it, and leapt back again, all in one movement. At the same instant a man in a concertina-like black suit, who had emerged from a side alley, ran towards Winston, pointing excitedly to the sky. \
\'91Steamer!\'92 he yelled. \'91Look out, guv\'92nor! Bang over\'92ead! Lay down quick!\'92 \
\'91Steamer\'92 was a nickname which, for some reason, the 10 1984 \
proles applied to rocket bombs. Winston promptly flung himself on his face. The proles were nearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind. They seemed to possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advance when a rocket was coming, although the rockets supposedly travelled faster than sound. Win- ston clasped his forearms above his head. There was a roar that seemed to make the pavement heave; a shower of light objects pattered on to his back. When he stood up he found that he was covered with fragments of glass from the near- est window. \
He walked on. The bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up the street. A black plume of smoke hung in the sky, and below it a cloud of plaster dust in which a crowd was already forming around the ruins. There was a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him, and in the middle of it he could see a bright red streak. When he got up to it he saw that it was a human hand severed at the wrist. Apart from the bloody stump, the hand was so com- pletely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast. \
He kicked the thing into the gutter, and then, to avoid the crowd, turned down a side-street to the right. With- in three or four minutes he was out of the area which the bomb had affected, and the sordid swarming life of the streets was going on as though nothing had happened. It was nearly twenty hours, and the drinking-shops which the proles frequented (\'92pubs\'92, they called them) were choked with customers. From their grimy swing doors, endlessly opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urine, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 10 \
sawdust, and sour beer. In an angle formed by a projecting house-front three men were standing very close togeth- er, the middle one of them holding a folded-up newspaper which the other two were studying over his shoulder. Even before he was near enough to make out the expression on their faces, Winston could see absorption in every line of their bodies. It was obviously some serious piece of news that they were reading. He was a few paces away from them when suddenly the group broke up and two of the men were in violent altercation. For a moment they seemed almost on the point of blows. \
\'91Can\'92t you bleeding well listen to what I say? I tell you no number ending in seven ain\'92t won for over fourteen months!\'92 \
\'91Yes, it \'91as, then!\'92 \
\'91No, it \'91as not! Back \'91ome I got the \'91ole lot of \'91em for over two years wrote down on a piece of paper. I takes \'91em down reg\'92lar as the clock. An\'92 I tell you, no number ending in seven\'97\'97\'92 \
\'91Yes, a seven \'91AS won! I could pretty near tell you the bleeding number. Four oh seven, it ended in. It were in Feb- ruary\'97second week in February.\'92 \
\'91February your grandmother! I got it all down in black and white. An\'92 I tell you, no number\'97\'97\'92 \
\'91Oh, pack it in!\'92 said the third man. \
They were talking about the Lottery. Winston looked back when he had gone thirty metres. They were still ar- guing, with vivid, passionate faces. The Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one public event \
108 1984 \
to which the proles paid serious attention. It was probable that there were some millions of proles for whom the Lot- tery was the principal if not the only reason for remaining alive. It was their delight, their folly, their anodyne, their intellectual stimulant. Where the Lottery was concerned, even people who could barely read and write seemed capa- ble of intricate calculations and staggering feats of memory. \
There was a whole tribe of men who made a living simply by selling systems, forecasts, and lucky amulets. Winston had nothing to do with the running of the Lottery, which was managed by the Ministry of Plenty, but he was aware (in- deed everyone in the party was aware) that the prizes were largely imaginary. Only small sums were actually paid out, the winners of the big prizes being non-existent persons. In the absence of any real intercommunication between one part of Oceania and another, this was not difficult to ar- range. \
But if there was hope, it lay in the proles. You had to cling on to that. When you put it in words it sounded reasonable: it was when you looked at the human beings passing you on the pavement that it became an act of faith. The street into which he had turned ran downhill. He had a feeling that he had been in this neighbourhood before, and that there was a main thoroughfare not far away. From somewhere ahead there came a din of shouting voices. The street took a sharp turn and then ended in a flight of steps which led down into a sunken alley where a few stall-keepers were selling tired- looking vegetables. At this moment Winston remembered where he was. The alley led out into the main street, and \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 109 \
down the next turning, not five minutes away, was the junk- shop where he had bought the blank book which was now his diary. And in a small stationer\'92s shop not far away he had bought his penholder and his bottle of ink. \
He paused for a moment at the top of the steps. On the opposite side of the alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frosted over but in reality were merely coated with dust. A very old man, bent but active, with white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawn, pushed open the swing door and went in. As Win- ston stood watching, it occurred to him that the old man, who must be eighty at the least, had already been middle- aged when the Revolution happened. He and a few others like him were the last links that now existed with the van- ished world of capitalism. In the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideas had been formed before the Revolution. The older generation had mostly been wiped out in the great purges of the fifties and sixties, and the few who survived had long ago been terrified into complete intellec- tual surrender. If there was any one still alive who could give you a truthful account of conditions in the early part of the century, it could only be a prole. Suddenly the pas- sage from the history book that he had copied into his diary came back into Winston\'92s mind, and a lunatic impulse took hold of him. He would go into the pub, he would scrape ac- quaintance with that old man and question him. He would say to him: \'91Tell me about your life when you were a boy. What was it like in those days? Were things better than they are now, or were they worse?\'92 \
110 1984 \
Hurriedly, lest he should have time to become frightened, he descended the steps and crossed the narrow street. It was madness of course. As usual, there was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting their pubs, but it was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed. If the pa- trols appeared he might plead an attack of faintness, but it was not likely that they would believe him. He pushed open the door, and a hideous cheesy smell of sour beer hit him in the face. As he entered the din of voices dropped to about half its volume. Behind his back he could feel everyone eye- ing his blue overalls. A game of darts which was going on at the other end of the room interrupted itself for perhaps as much as thirty seconds. The old man whom he had followed was standing at the bar, having some kind of altercation with the barman, a large, stout, hook-nosed young man with enormous forearms. A knot of others, standing round with glasses in their hands, were watching the scene. \
\'91I arst you civil enough, didn\'92t I?\'92 said the old man, straightening his shoulders pugnaciously. \'91You telling me you ain\'92t got a pint mug in the \'91ole bleeding boozer?\'92 \
\'91And what in hell\'92s name IS a pint?\'92 said the barman, lean- ing forward with the tips of his fingers on the counter. \
\'91\'92Ark at \'91im! Calls \'91isself a barman and don\'92t know what a pint is! Why, a pint\'92s the \'91alf of a quart, and there\'92s four quarts to the gallon. \'91Ave to teach you the A, B, C next.\'92 \
\'91Never heard of \'91em,\'92 said the barman shortly. \'91Litre and half litre\'97that\'92s all we serve. There\'92s the glasses on the shelf in front of you.\'92 \
\'91I likes a pint,\'92 persisted the old man. \'91You could \'91a drawed Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 111 \
me off a pint easy enough. We didn\'92t \'91ave these bleeding li- tres when I was a young man.\'92 \
\'91When you were a young man we were all living in the treetops,\'92 said the barman, with a glance at the other cus- tomers. \
There was a shout of laughter, and the uneasiness caused by Winston\'92s entry seemed to disappear. The old man\'92s whit- estubbled face had flushed pink. He turned away, muttering to himself, and bumped into Winston. Winston caught him gently by the arm. \
\'91May I offer you a drink?\'92 he said. \
\'91You\'92re a gent,\'92 said the other, straightening his shoul- ders again. He appeared not to have noticed Winston\'92s blue overalls. \'91Pint!\'92 he added aggressively to the barman. \'91Pint of wallop.\'92 \
The barman swished two half-litres of dark-brown beer into thick glasses which he had rinsed in a bucket under the counter. Beer was the only drink you could get in prole pubs. The proles were supposed not to drink gin, though in practice they could get hold of it easily enough. The game of darts was in full swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begun talking about lottery tickets. Winston\'92s presence was forgotten for a moment. There was a deal table under the window where he and the old man could talk without fear of being overheard. It was horribly dangerous, but at any rate there was no telescreen in the room, a point he had made sure of as soon as he came in. \
\'91\'92E could \'91a drawed me off a pint,\'92 grumbled the old man as he settled down behind a glass. \'91A \'91alf litre ain\'92t enough. It \
11 1984 \
don\'92t satisfy. And a \'91ole litre\'92s too much. It starts my bladder running. Let alone the price.\'92 \
\'91You must have seen great changes since you were a young man,\'92 said Winston tentatively. \
The old man\'92s pale blue eyes moved from the darts board to the bar, and from the bar to the door of the Gents, as though it were in the bar-room that he expected the chang- es to have occurred. \
\'91The beer was better,\'92 he said finally. \'91And cheaper! When I was a young man, mild beer\'97wallop we used to call it\'97 was fourpence a pint. That was before the war, of course.\'92 \
\'91Which war was that?\'92 said Winston. \
\'91It\'92s all wars,\'92 said the old man vaguely. He took up his glass, and his shoulders straightened again. \'91\'92Ere\'92s wishing you the very best of \'91ealth!\'92 \
In his lean throat the sharp-pointed Adam\'92s apple made a surprisingly rapid up-and-down movement, and the beer vanished. Winston went to the bar and came back with two more half-litres. The old man appeared to have forgotten his prejudice against drinking a full litre. \
\'91You are very much older than I am,\'92 said Winston. \'91You must have been a grown man before I was born. You can remember what it was like in the old days, before the Revo- lution. People of my age don\'92t really know anything about those times. We can only read about them in books, and what it says in the books may not be true. I should like your opinion on that. The history books say that life before the Revolution was completely different from what it is now. \
There was the most terrible oppression, injustice, poverty Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
worse than anything we can imagine. Here in London, the great mass of the people never had enough to eat from birth to death. Half of them hadn\'92t even boots on their feet. They worked twelve hours a day, they left school at nine, they slept ten in a room. And at the same time there were a very few people, only a few thousands\'97the capitalists, they were called\'97who were rich and powerful. They owned every- thing that there was to own. They lived in great gorgeous houses with thirty servants, they rode about in motor-cars and four-horse carriages, they drank champagne, they wore top hats\'97\'97\'92 \
The old man brightened suddenly. \
\'91Top \'91ats!\'92 he said. \'91Funny you should mention \'91em. The same thing come into my \'91ead only yesterday, I dono why. I was jest thinking, I ain\'92t seen a top \'91at in years. Gorn right out, they \'91ave. The last time I wore one was at my sister-in- law\'92s funeral. And that was\'97well, I couldn\'92t give you the date, but it must\'92a been fifty years ago. Of course it was only \
\'91ired for the occasion, you understand.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91It isn\'92t very important about the top hats,\'92 said Winston \
patiently. \'91The point is, these capitalists\'97they and a few lawyers and priests and so forth who lived on them\'97were the lords of the earth. Everything existed for their benefit. You\'97the ordinary people, the workers\'97were their slaves. They could do what they liked with you. They could ship you off to Canada like cattle. They could sleep with your daughters if they chose. They could order you to be flogged with something called a cat-o\'92-nine tails. You had to take your cap off when you passed them. Every capitalist went \
114 1984 \
about with a gang of lackeys who\'97\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 The old man brightened again.\u8232 \'91Lackeys!\'92 he said. \'91Now there\'92s a word I ain\'92t \'91eard since \
ever so long. Lackeys! That reg\'92lar takes me back, that does. I recollect oh, donkey\'92s years ago\'97I used to sometimes go to \'91Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon to \'91ear the blokes making speeches. Salvation Army, Roman Catholics, Jews, Indi- ans\'97all sorts there was. And there was one bloke\'97well, I couldn\'92t give you \'91is name, but a real powerful speaker \'91e was. \'91E didn\'92t \'91alf give it \'91em! \'91Lackeys!\'92 \'91e says, \'91lackeys of the bourgeoisie! Flunkies of the ruling class!\'92 Parasites\'97 that was another of them. And \'91yenas\'97\'92e definitely called \'91em \'91yenas. Of course \'91e was referring to the Labour Party, you understand.\'92 \
Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross- purposes. \
\'91What I really wanted to know was this,\'92 he said. \'91Do you feel that you have more freedom now than you had in those days? Are you treated more like a human being? In the old days, the rich people, the people at the top\'97\'97\'92 \
\'91The \'91Ouse of Lords,\'92 put in the old man reminiscently. \
\'91The House of Lords, if you like. What I am asking is, were these people able to treat you as an inferior, simply because they were rich and you were poor? Is it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them \'91Sir\'92 and take off your cap when you passed them?\'92 \
The old man appeared to think deeply. He drank off about a quarter of his beer before answering. \
\'91Yes,\'92 he said. \'91They liked you to touch your cap to \'91em. Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
It showed respect, like. I didn\'92t agree with it, myself, but I done it often enough. Had to, as you might say.\'92 \
\'91And was it usual\'97I\'92m only quoting what I\'92ve read in his- tory books\'97was it usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavement into the gutter?\'92 \
\'91One of \'91em pushed me once,\'92 said the old man. \'91I recol- lect it as if it was yesterday. It was Boat Race night\'97terribly rowdy they used to get on Boat Race night\'97and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue. Quite a gent, \
\'91e was\'97dress shirt, top \'91at, black overcoat. \'91E was kind of zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into \'91im acci- dental-like. \'91E says, \'91Why can\'92t you look where you\'92re going?\'92 \
\'91e says. I say, \'91Ju think you\'92ve bought the bleeding pavement?\'92 \'91E says, \'91I\'92ll twist your bloody \'91ead off if you get fresh with me.\'92 I says, \'91You\'92re drunk. I\'92ll give you in charge in \'91alf a minute,\'92 I says. An\'92 if you\'92ll believe me, \'91e puts \'91is \'91and on my chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under the wheels of a bus. Well, I was young in them days, and I was \
going to \'91ave fetched \'91im one, only\'97\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston. The old \
man\'92s memory was nothing but a rubbish-heap of details. One could question him all day without getting any real information. The party histories might still be true, after a fashion: they might even be completely true. He made a last attempt. \
\'91Perhaps I have not made myself clear,\'92 he said. \'91What I\'92m trying to say is this. You have been alive a very long time; you lived half your life before the Revolution. In 1925, for instance, you were already grown up. Would you say from \
11 1984 \
what you can remember, that life in 1925 was better than it is now, or worse? If you could choose, would you prefer to live then or now?\'92 \
The old man looked meditatively at the darts board. He finished up his beer, more slowly than before. When he spoke it was with a tolerant philosophical air, as though the beer had mellowed him. \
\'91I know what you expect me to say,\'92 he said. \'91You expect me to say as I\'92d sooner be young again. Most people\'92d say they\'92d sooner be young, if you arst\'92 \'91em. You got your \'91ealth and strength when you\'92re young. When you get to my time of life you ain\'92t never well. I suffer something wicked from my feet, and my bladder\'92s jest terrible. Six and seven times a night it \'91as me out of bed. On the other \'91and, there\'92s great advantages in being a old man. You ain\'92t got the same wor- ries. No truck with women, and that\'92s a great thing. I ain\'92t \
\'91ad a woman for near on thirty year, if you\'92d credit it. Nor wanted to, what\'92s more.\'92 \
Winston sat back against the window-sill. It was no use going on. He was about to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffled rapidly into the stink- ing urinal at the side of the room. The extra half-litre was already working on him. Winston sat for a minute or two gazing at his empty glass, and hardly noticed when his feet carried him out into the street again. Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the huge and simple question, \
\'91Was life better before the Revolution than it is now?\'92 would have ceased once and for all to be answerable. But in effect it was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered sur- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
vivors from the ancient world were incapable of comparing one age with another. They remembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for a lost bicy- cle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister\'92s face, the swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago: but all the relevant facts were outside the range of their vision. They were like the ant, which can see small objects but not large ones. And when memory failed and written records were falsified\'97when that happened, the claim of the Party to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted, because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard against which it could be tested. \
At this moment his train of thought stopped abruptly. He halted and looked up. He was in a narrow street, with a few dark little shops, interspersed among dwelling-houses. Immediately above his head there hung three discoloured metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded. He seemed to know the place. Of course! He was standing outside the junk-shop where he had bought the diary. \
A twinge of fear went through him. It had been a suf- ficiently rash act to buy the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near the place again. And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander, his feet had brought him back here of their own accord. It was precisely against suicidal impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himself by opening the diary. At the same time he noticed that although it was nearly twenty-one hours the shop was still open. With the feeling that he would be less conspicuous inside than hanging about on the pavement, \
118 1984 \
he stepped through the doorway. If questioned, he could plausibly say that he was trying to buy razor blades. \
The proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off an unclean but friendly smell. He was a man of per- haps sixty, frail and bowed, with a long, benevolent nose, and mild eyes distorted by thick spectacles. His hair was al- most white, but his eyebrows were bushy and still black. His spectacles, his gentle, fussy movements, and the fact that he was wearing an aged jacket of black velvet, gave him a vague air of intellectuality, as though he had been some kind of literary man, or perhaps a musician. His voice was soft, as though faded, and his accent less debased than that of the majority of proles. \
\'91I recognized you on the pavement,\'92 he said immediately. \'91You\'92re the gentleman that bought the young lady\'92s keepsake \
album. That was a beautiful bit of paper, that was. Cream- laid, it used to be called. There\'92s been no paper like that made for\'97oh, I dare say fifty years.\'92 He peered at Winston over the top of his spectacles. \'91Is there anything special I can do for you? Or did you just want to look round?\'92 \
\'91I was passing,\'92 said Winston vaguely. \'91I just looked in. I don\'92t want anything in particular.\'92 \
\'91It\'92s just as well,\'92 said the other, \'91because I don\'92t suppose I could have satisfied you.\'92 He made an apologetic gesture with his softpalmed hand. \'91You see how it is; an empty shop, you might say. Between you and me, the antique trade\'92s just about finished. No demand any longer, and no stock either. Furniture, china, glass it\'92s all been broken up by degrees. And of course the metal stuff\'92s mostly been melted down. I \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 119 \
haven\'92t seen a brass candlestick in years.\'92\uc0\u8232 The tiny interior of the shop was in fact uncomfortably \
full, but there was almost nothing in it of the slightest val- ue. The floorspace was very restricted, because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusty picture-frames. In the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-out chisels, penknives with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not even pretend to be in going order, and other miscellaneous rubbish. Only on a small table in the corner was there a litter of odds and ends\'97lacquered snuffbox- es, agate brooches, and the like\'97which looked as though they might include something interesting. As Winston wandered towards the table his eye was caught by a round, smooth thing that gleamed softly in the lamplight, and he picked it up. \
It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, flat on the other, making almost a hemisphere. There was a peculiar softness, as of rainwater, in both the colour and the texture of the glass. At the heart of it, magnified by the curved surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object that recalled a rose or a sea anemone. \
\'91What is it?\'92 said Winston, fascinated. \
\'91That\'92s coral, that is,\'92 said the old man. \'91It must have come from the Indian Ocean. They used to kind of embed it in the glass. That wasn\'92t made less than a hundred years ago. More, by the look of it.\'92 \
\'91It\'92s a beautiful thing,\'92 said Winston. \
\'91It is a beautiful thing,\'92 said the other appreciatively. \'91But there\'92s not many that\'92d say so nowadays.\'92 He coughed. \'91Now, \
10 1984 \
if it so happened that you wanted to buy it, that\'92d cost you four dollars. I can remember when a thing like that would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was\'97well, I can\'92t work it out, but it was a lot of money. But who cares about genuine antiques nowadays\'97even the few that\'92s left?\'92 \
Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing into his pocket. What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different from the pres- ent one. The soft, rainwatery glass was not like any glass that he had ever seen. The thing was doubly attractive because of its apparent uselessness, though he could guess that it must once have been intended as a paperweight. It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunately it did not make much of a bulge. It was a queer thing, even a compromising thing, for a Party member to have in his possession. Anything old, and for that matter anything beautiful, was always vaguely suspect. The old man had grown noticeably more cheerful after receiving the four dollars. Winston realized that he would have accepted three or even two. \
\'91There\'92s another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,\'92 he said. \'91There\'92s not much in it. Just a few pieces. We\'92ll do with a light if we\'92re going upstairs.\'92 \
He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up the steep and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which did not give on the street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of chimney-pots. Winston noticed that the furniture was still arranged as though the \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
room were meant to be lived in. There was a strip of car- pet on the floor, a picture or two on the walls, and a deep, slatternly arm-chair drawn up to the fireplace. An old-fash- ioned glass clock with a twelve-hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece. Under the window, and occupying nearly a quarter of the room, was an enormous bed with the mattress still on it. \
\'91We lived here till my wife died,\'92 said the old man half apologetically. \'91I\'92m selling the furniture off by little and little. Now that\'92s a beautiful mahogany bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it. But I dare say you\'92d find it a little bit cumbersome.\'92 \
He was holdlng the lamp high up, so as to illuminate the whole room, and in the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting. The thought flitted through Winston\'92s mind that it would probably be quite easy to rent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk. It was a wild, impossible notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of; but the room had awakened in him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestral memory. It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit in a room like this, in an arm- chair beside an open fire with your feet in the fender and a kettle on the hob; utterly alone, utterly secure, with nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singing of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock. \
\'91There\'92s no telescreen!\'92 he could not help murmuring. \
\'91Ah,\'92 said the old man, \'91I never had one of those things. Too expensive. And I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow. Now that\'92s a nice gateleg table in the corner there. \
1 1984 \
Though of course you\'92d have to put new hinges on it if you wanted to use the flaps.\'92 \
There was a small bookcase in the other corner, and Winston had already gravitated towards it. It contained nothing but rubbish. The hunting-down and destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness in the prole quarters as everywhere else. It was very unlikely that there existed anywhere in Oceania a copy of a book printed \
earlier than 1960. The old man, still carrying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture in a rosewood frame which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposite the bed. \
\'91Now, if you happen to be interested in old prints at all\'97 \'97\'92 he began delicately. \
Winston came across to examine the picture. It was a steel engraving of an oval building with rectangular win- dows, and a small tower in front. There was a railing running round the building, and at the rear end there was what appeared to be a statue. Winston gazed at it for some moments. It seemed vaguely familiar, though he did not re- member the statue. \
\'91The frame\'92s fixed to the wall,\'92 said the old man, \'91but I could unscrew it for you, I dare say.\'92 \
\'91I know that building,\'92 said Winston finally. \'91It\'92s a ruin now. It\'92s in the middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice.\'92 \
\'91That\'92s right. Outside the Law Courts. It was bombed in\'97 oh, many years ago. It was a church at one time, St Clement Danes, its name was.\'92 He smiled apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightly ridiculous, and add- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
ed: \'91Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s!\'92 \'91What\'92s that?\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 \'91Oh\'97\'91Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s.\'92 \
That was a rhyme we had when I was a little boy. How it goes on I don\'92t remember, but I do know it ended up, \'91Here comes a candle to light you to bed, Here comes a chopper to chop off your head.\'92 It was a kind of a dance. They held out their arms for you to pass under, and when they came to \'91Here comes a chopper to chop off your head\'92 they brought their arms down and caught you. It was just names of churches. All the London churches were in it\'97all the principal ones, that is.\'92 \
Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged. It was always difficult to determine the age of a London building. Anything large and impressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automatically claimed as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that was obviously of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middle Ages. The centuries of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of any value. One could not learn history from architecture any more than one could learn it from books. Statues, inscriptions, memori- al stones, the names of streets\'97anything that might throw light upon the past had been systematically altered. \
\'91I never knew it had been a church,\'92 he said. \
\'91There\'92s a lot of them left, really,\'92 said the old man, \'91though they\'92ve been put to other uses. Now, how did that rhyme go? \
Ah! I\'92ve got it!\uc0\u8232 \'91Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s, You \
14 1984 \
owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin\'92s\'97\'97\'91 there, now, that\'92s as far as I can get. A farthing, that was \
a small copper coin, looked something like a cent.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Where was St Martin\'92s?\'92 said Winston.\u8232 \'91St Martin\'92s? That\'92s still standing. It\'92s in Victory Square, \
alongside the picture gallery. A building with a kind of a tri- angular porch and pillars in front, and a big flight of steps.\'92 Winston knew the place well. It was a museum used for propaganda displays of various kinds\'97scale models of \
rocket bombs and Floating Fortresses, waxwork tableaux il- lustrating enemy atrocities, and the like. \
\'91St Martin\'92s-in-the-Fields it used to be called,\'92 supple- mented the old man, \'91though I don\'92t recollect any fields anywhere in those parts.\'92 \
Winston did not buy the picture. It would have been an even more incongruous possession than the glass paper- weight, and impossible to carry home, unless it were taken out of its frame. But he lingered for some minutes more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was not \
Weeks\'97as one might have gathered from the inscription over the shop-front\'97but Charrington. Mr Charrington, it seemed, was a widower aged sixty-three and had inhabit- ed this shop for thirty years. Throughout that time he had been intending to alter the name over the window, but had never quite got to the point of doing it. All the while that they were talking the half-remembered rhyme kept run- ning through Winston\'92s head. Oranges and lemons say the bells of St Clement\'92s, You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin\'92s! It was curious, but when you said it to \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
yourself you had the illusion of actually hearing bells, the bells of a lost London that still existed somewhere or other, disguised and forgotten. From one ghostly steeple after an- other he seemed to hear them pealing forth. Yet so far as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bells ringing. \
He got away from Mr Charrington and went down the stairs alone, so as not to let the old man see him recon- noitring the street before stepping out of the door. He had already made up his mind that after a suitable interval\'97a month, say\'97he would take the risk of visiting the shop again. It was perhaps not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centre. The serious piece of folly had been to come back here in the first place, after buying the diary and without knowing whether the proprietor of the shop could be trusted. However\'97\'97! \
Yes, he thought again, he would come back. He would buy further scraps of beautiful rubbish. He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, take it out of its frame, and carry it home concealed under the jacket of his overalls. He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charrington\'92s memory. Even the lunatic project of renting the room up- stairs flashed momentarily through his mind again. For perhaps five seconds exaltation made him careless, and he stepped out on to the pavement without so much as a pre- liminary glance through the window. He had even started humming to an improvised tune \
Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s, You owe me three farthings, say the\'97\'97 \
1 1984 \
Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bow- els to water. A figure in blue overalls was coming down the pavement, not ten metres away. It was the girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair. The light was failing, but there was no difficulty in recognizing her. She looked him straight in the face, then walked quickly on as though she had not seen him. \
For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move. Then he turned to the right and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he was going in the wrong direction. At any rate, one question was settled. There was no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him. She must have followed him here, because it was not credible \
that by pure chance she should have happened to be walk- ing on the same evening up the same obscure backstreet, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party members lived. It was too great a coincidence. Whether she was really an agent of the Thought Police, or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness, hardly mattered. It was enough that she was watching him. Probably she had seen him go into the pub as well. \
It was an effort to walk. The lump of glass in his pocket banged against his thigh at each step, and he was half mind- ed to take it out and throw it away. The worst thing was the pain in his belly. For a couple of minutes he had the feeling that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soon. But there would be no public lavatories in a quarter like this. \
Then the spasm passed, leaving a dull ache behind.\uc0\u8232 The street was a blind alley. Winston halted, stood \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
for several seconds wondering vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace his steps. As he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed him three minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with her. He could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and then smash her skull in with a cob- blestone. The piece of glass in his pocket would be heavy enough for the job. But he abandoned the idea immediately, because even the thought of making any physical effort was unbearable. He could not run, he could not strike a blow. Besides, she was young and lusty and would defend herself. He thought also of hurrying to the Community Centre and staying there till the place closed, so as to establish a partial alibi for the evening. But that too was impossible. A deadly lassitude had taken hold of him. All he wanted was to get home quickly and then sit down and be quiet. \
It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat. The lights would be switched off at the main at twenty- three thirty. He went into the kitchen and swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin. Then he went to the table in the alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawer. But he did not open it at once. From the telescreen a brassy fe- male voice was squalling a patriotic song. He sat staring at the marbled cover of the book, trying without success to shut the voice out of his consciousness. \
It was at night that they came for you, always at night. The proper thing was to kill yourself before they got you. Un- doubtedly some people did so. Many of the disappearances were actually suicides. But it needed desperate courage to \
18 1984 \
kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick and certain poison, were completely unprocurable. He thought with a kind of astonishment of the biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treachery of the human body which always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment when a special effort is needed. He might have silenced the dark- haired girl if only he had acted quickly enough: but precisely because of the extremity of his danger he had lost the power to act. It struck him that in moments of crisis one is nev- er fighting against an external enemy, but always against one\'92s own body. Even now, in spite of the gin, the dull ache in his belly made consecutive thought impossible. And it is the same, he perceived, in all seemingly heroic or trag- ic situations. On the battlefield, in the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the issues that you are fighting for are al- ways forgotten, because the body swells up until it fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright or screaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger or cold or sleeplessness, against a sour stom- ach or an aching tooth. \
He opened the diary. It was important to write some- thing down. The woman on the telescreen had started a new song. Her voice seemed to stick into his brain like jagged splinters of glass. He tried to think of O\'92Brien, for whom, or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinking of the things that would happen to him after the \
Thought Police took him away. It would not matter if they killed you at once. To be killed was what you expected. But before death (nobody spoke of such things, yet everybody \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
knew of them) there was the routine of confession that had to be gone through: the grovelling on the floor and scream- ing for mercy, the crack of broken bones, the smashed teeth, and bloody clots of hair. \
Why did you have to endure it, since the end was al- ways the same? Why was it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life? Nobody ever escaped detection, and nobody ever failed to confess. When once you had suc- cumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would be dead. Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to lie embedded in future time? \
He tried with a little more success than before to sum- mon up the image of O\'92Brien. \'91We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,\'92 O\'92Brien had said to him. He knew what it meant, or thought he knew. The place where there is no darkness was the imagined future, which one would never see, but which, by foreknowledge, one could mystically share in. But with the voice from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the train of thought further. He put a cigarette in his mouth. Half the tobacco promptly fell out on to his tongue, a bitter dust which was difficult to spit out again. The face of Big Brother swam into his mind, displacing that of O\'92Brien. Just as he had done a few days earlier, he slid a coin out of his pocket and looked at it. The face gazed up at him, heavy, calm, protecting: but what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache? Like a leaden knell the words came back at him: \
10 \
1984 \
WAR IS PEACE \
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
Part Two \
1 1984 \
Chapter 1 \
\dn32 I\up0 t was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubicle to go to the lavatory.\uc0\u8232 A solitary figure was coming towards him from the oth- \
er end of the long, brightly-lit corridor. It was the girl with dark hair. Four days had gone past since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shop. As she came nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling, not notice- able at a distance because it was of the same colour as her overalls. Probably she had crushed her hand while swing- ing round one of the big kaleidoscopes on which the plots of novels were \'91roughed in\'92. It was a common accident in the Fiction Department. \
They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stum- bled and fell almost flat on her face. A sharp cry of pain was wrung out of her. She must have fallen right on the injured arm. Winston stopped short. The girl had risen to her knees. Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her mouth stood out redder than ever. Her eyes were fixed on his, with an appealing expression that looked more like fear than pain. \
A curious emotion stirred in Winston\'92s heart. In front of him was an enemy who was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human creature, in pain and perhaps with a broken bone. Already he had instinctively started forward \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
to help her. In the moment when he had seen her fall on the bandaged arm, it had been as though he felt the pain in his own body. \
\'91You\'92re hurt?\'92 he said.\uc0\u8232 \'91It\'92s nothing. My arm. It\'92ll be all right in a second.\'92 \
She spoke as though her heart were fluttering. She had certainly turned very pale. \
\'91You haven\'92t broken anything?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91No, I\'92m all right. It hurt for a moment, that\'92s all.\'92 \
She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up. She had regained some of her colour, and appeared very much better. \
\'91It\'92s nothing,\'92 she repeated shortly. \'91I only gave my wrist a bit of a bang. Thanks, comrade!\'92 \
And with that she walked on in the direction in which she had been going, as briskly as though it had really been nothing. The whole incident could not have taken as much as half a minute. Not to let one\'92s feelings appear in one\'92s face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct, and in any case they had been standing straight in front of a telescreen when the thing happened. Nevertheless it had been very difficult not to betray a momentary surprise, for in the two or three seconds while he was helping her up the girl had slipped something into his hand. There was no question that she had done it intentionally. It was some- thing small and flat. As he passed through the lavatory door he transferred it to his pocket and felt it with the tips of his fingers. It was a scrap of paper folded into a square. \
While he stood at the urinal he managed, with a little 14 1984 \
more fingering, to get it unfolded. Obviously there must be a message of some kind written on it. For a moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water-closets and read it at once. But that would be shocking folly, as he well knew. There was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens were watched continuously. \
He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the frag- ment of paper casually among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles and hitched the speakwrite towards him. \'91Five minutes,\'92 he told himself, \'91five minutes at the very least!\'92 His heart bumped in his breast with frightening loudness. Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on was mere routine, the rectification of a long list of figures, not needing close attention. \
Whatever was written on the paper, it must have some kind of political meaning. So far as he could see there were two possibilities. One, much the more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Police, just as he had feared. He did not know why the Thought Police should choose to deliver their messages in such a fashion, but perhaps they had their reasons. The thing that was written on the paper might be a threat, a summons, an order to commit suicide, a trap of some description. But there was another, wilder possibility that kept raising its head, though he tried vain- ly to suppress it. This was, that the message did not come from the Thought Police at all, but from some kind of un- derground organization. Perhaps the Brotherhood existed after all! Perhaps the girl was part of it! No doubt the idea was absurd, but it had sprung into his mind in the very in- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
stant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand. It was not till a couple of minutes later that the other, more probable ex- planation had occurred to him. And even now, though his intellect told him that the message probably meant death\'97 still, that was not what he believed, and the unreasonable hope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with diffi- culty that he kept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into the speakwrite. \
He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatic tube. Eight minutes had gone by. He re- adjusted his spectacles on his nose, sighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap of paper on top of it. He flattened it out. On it was written, in a large un- formed handwriting: \
I LOVE YOU. \
For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminating thing into the memory hole. When he did so, although he knew very well the danger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading it once again, just to make sure that the words were really there. \
For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work. What was even worse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was the need to conceal his agitation from the telescreen. He felt as though a fire were burning in his belly. Lunch in the hot, crowded, noise-filled canteen was torment. He had hoped to be alone for a little while during the lunch hour, but as bad luck would have it the \
1 1984 \
imbecile Parsons flopped down beside him, the tang of his sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of stew, and kept up a stream of talk about the preparations for Hate Week. He was particularly enthusiastic about a papier-mache model of Big Brother\'92s head, two metres wide, which was being made for the occasion by his daughter\'92s troop of Spies. The irri- tating thing was that in the racket of voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was saying, and was constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated. Just once he caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two oth- er girls at the far end of the room. She appeared not to have seen him, and he did not look in that direction again. \
The afternoon was more bearable. Immediately after lunch there arrived a delicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours and necessitated putting everything else aside. It consisted in falsifying a series of production re- ports of two years ago, in such a way as to cast discredit on a prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under a cloud. This was the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for more than two hours he succeeded in shutting the girl out of his mind altogether. Then the memory of her face came back, and with it a raging, intolerable desire to be alone. Until he could be alone it was impossible to think this new development out. Tonight was one of his nights at the Community Centre. He wolfed another tasteless meal in the canteen, hurried off to the Centre, took part in the solemn foolery of a \'91discussion group\'92, played two games of table tennis, swallowed several glasses of gin, and sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled \'91Ingsoc in relation to \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
chess\'92. His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no impulse to shirk his evening at the Centre. At the sight of the words I LOVE YOU the desire to stay alive had welled up in him, and the taking of minor risks suddenly seemed stupid. It was not till twenty-three hours, when he was home and in bed\'97in the darkness, where you were safe even from the telescreen so long as you kept silent\'97that he was able to think continuously. \
It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch with the girl and arrange a meeting. He did not consider any longer the possibility that she might be laying some kind of trap for him. He knew that it was not so, because of her unmistakable agitation when she handed him the note. Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as well she might be. Nor did the idea of refusing her advances even cross his mind. Only five nights ago he had contemplated smashing her skull in with a cobblestone, but that was of no importance. He thought of her naked, youth- ful body, as he had seen it in his dream. He had imagined her a fool like all the rest of them, her head stuffed with lies and hatred, her belly full of ice. A kind of fever seized him at the thought that he might lose her, the white youthful body might slip away from him! What he feared more than any- thing else was that she would simply change her mind if he did not get in touch with her quickly. But the physical dif- ficulty of meeting was enormous. It was like trying to make a move at chess when you were already mated. Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced you. Actually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred to \
18 1984 \
him within five minutes of reading the note; but now, with time to think, he went over them one by one, as though lay- ing out a row of instruments on a table. \
Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could not be repeated. If she had worked in the Re- cords Department it might have been comparatively simple, but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts in the building the Fiction Department lay, and he had no pretext for going there. If he had known where she lived, and at what time she left work, he could have contrived to meet her some- where on her way home; but to try to follow her home was not safe, because it would mean loitering about outside the Ministry, which was bound to be noticed. As for sending a letter through the mails, it was out of the question. By a routine that was not even secret, all letters were opened in transit. Actually, few people ever wrote letters. For the messages that it was occasionally necessary to send, there were printed postcards with long lists of phrases, and you struck out the ones that were inapplicable. In any case he did not know the girl\'92s name, let alone her address. Final- ly he decided that the safest place was the canteen. If he could get her at a table by herself, somewhere in the middle of the room, not too near the telescreens, and with a suf- ficient buzz of conversation all round\'97if these conditions endured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be possible to ex- change a few words. \
For a week after this, life was like a restless dream. On the next day she did not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle having already blown. Presum- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
ably she had been changed on to a later shift. They passed each other without a glance. On the day after that she was in the canteen at the usual time, but with three other girls and immediately under a telescreen. Then for three dread- ful days she did not appear at all. His whole mind and body seemed to be afflicted with an unbearable sensitivity, a sort of transparency, which made every movement, every sound, every contact, every word that he had to speak or listen to, an agony. Even in sleep he could not altogether escape from her image. He did not touch the diary during those days. If there was any relief, it was in his work, in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten minutes at a stretch. He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her. There was no enquiry he could make. She might have been vaporized, she might have committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other end of Oceania: worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed her mind and decided to avoid him. \
The next day she reappeared. Her arm was out of the sling and she had a band of sticking-plaster round her wrist. The relief of seeing her was so great that he could not resist star- ing directly at her for several seconds. On the following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to her. When he came into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the wall, and was quite alone. It was early, and the place was not very full. The queue edged forward till Winston was almost at the counter, then was held up for two minutes because someone in front was complaining that he had not received his tablet of saccharine. But the girl was still alone \
140 1984 \
when Winston secured his tray and began to make for her table. He walked casually towards her, his eyes searching for a place at some table beyond her. She was perhaps three metres away from him. Another two seconds would do it. Then a voice behind him called, \'91Smith!\'92 He pretended not to hear. \'91Smith!\'92 repeated the voice, more loudly. It was no use. He turned round. A blond-headed, silly-faced young man named Wilsher, whom he barely knew, was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his table. It was not safe to refuse. After having been recognized, he could not go and sit at a table with an unattended girl. It was too no- ticeable. He sat down with a friendly smile. The silly blond face beamed into his. Winston had a hallucination of him- self smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of it. The girl\'92s table filled up a few minutes later. \
But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would take the hint. Next day he took care to arrive early. Surely enough, she was at a table in about the same place, and again alone. The person immediately ahead of him in the queue was a small, swiftly-moving, beetle-like man with a flat face and tiny, suspicious eyes. As Winston turned away from the counter with his tray, he saw that the little man was making straight for the girl\'92s table. His hopes sank again. There was a vacant place at a table further away, but something in the little man\'92s appearance suggested that he would be sufficiently attentive to his own comfort to choose the emptiest table. With ice at his heart Winston followed. It was no use unless he could get the girl alone. \
At this moment there was a tremendous crash. The little Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 141 \
man was sprawling on all fours, his tray had gone flying, two streams of soup and coffee were flowing across the floor. He started to his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, whom he evidently suspected of having tripped him up. But it was all right. Five seconds later, with a thundering heart, Winston was sitting at the girl\'92s table. \
He did not look at her. He unpacked his tray and prompt- ly began eating. It was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but now a terrible fear had taken possession of him. A week had gone by since she had first approached him. She would have changed her mind, she must have changed her mind! It was impossible that this af- fair should end successfully; such things did not happen in real life. He might have flinched altogether from speaking if at this moment he had not seen Ampleforth, the hairy-eared poet, wandering limply round the room with a tray, look- ing for a place to sit down. In his vague way Ampleforth was attached to Winston, and would certainly sit down at his table if he caught sight of him. There was perhaps a min- ute in which to act. Both Winston and the girl were eating steadily. The stuff they were eating was a thin stew, actually a soup, of haricot beans. In a low murmur Winston began speaking. Neither of them looked up; steadily they spooned the watery stuff into their mouths, and between spoonfuls exchanged the few necessary words in low expressionless voices. \
14 \
1984 \
\'91What time do you leave work?\'92 \'91Eighteen-thirty.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Where can we meet?\'92 \
\'91Victory Square, near the monument.\'92 \'91It\'92s full of telescreens.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91It doesn\'92t matter if there\'92s a crowd.\'92 \'91Any signal?\'92 \
\'91No. Don\'92t come up to me until you see me among a lot of people. And don\'92t look at me. Just keep somewhere near me.\'92 \
\'91What time?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Nineteen hours.\'92\u8232 \'91All right.\'92\u8232 Ampleforth failed to see Winston and sat down at an- \
other table. They did not speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting on opposite sides of the same table, they did not look at one another. The girl finished her lunch quickly and made off, while Winston stayed to smoke a cigarette. \
Winston was in Victory Square before the appointed time. He wandered round the base of the enormous flut- ed column, at the top of which Big Brother\'92s statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished the Eurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, it had been, a few years ago) in the Battle of Airstrip One. In the street in front of it there was a statue of a man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliver Cromwell. At five minutes past the hour the girl had still not appeared. Again the ter- rible fear seized upon Winston. She was not coming, she had changed her mind! He walked slowly up to the north side of the square and got a sort of pale-coloured pleasure from identifying St Martin\'92s Church, whose bells, when it \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 14 \
had bells, had chimed \'91You owe me three farthings.\'92 Then he saw the girl standing at the base of the monument, read- ing or pretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the column. It was not safe to go near her until some more peo- ple had accumulated. There were telescreens all round the pediment. But at this moment there was a din of shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from somewhere to the left. Suddenly everyone seemed to be running across the square. \
The girl nipped nimbly round the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rush. Winston followed. As he ran, he gathered from some shouted remarks that a convoy of Eurasian prisoners was passing. \
Already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the square. Winston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer edge of any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed his way forward into the heart of the crowd. Soon he was within arm\'92s length of the girl, but the way was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous woman, presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetrable wall of flesh. Winston wriggled himself sideways, and with a violent lunge man- aged to drive his shoulder between them. For a moment it felt as though his entrails were being ground to pulp be- tween the two muscular hips, then he had broken through, sweating a little. He was next to the girl. They were shoulder to shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them. \
A long line of trucks, with wooden-faced guards armed with sub-machine guns standing upright in each corner, was passing slowly down the street. In the trucks little yellow \
144 1984 \
men in shabby greenish uniforms were squatting, jammed close together. Their sad, Mongolian faces gazed out over the sides of the trucks utterly incurious. Occasionally when a truck jolted there was a clank-clank of metal: all the pris- oners were wearing leg-irons. Truck-load after truck-load of the sad faces passed. Winston knew they were there but he saw them only intermittently. The girl\'92s shoulder, and her arm right down to the elbow, were pressed against his. Her cheek was almost near enough for him to feel its warmth. She had immediately taken charge of the situation, just as she had done in the canteen. She began speaking in the same expressionless voice as before, with lips barely mov- ing, a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the rumbling of the trucks. \
\'91Can you hear me?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes.\'92\u8232 \'91Can you get Sunday afternoon off?\'92\u8232 \'91Yes.\'92\u8232 \'91Then listen carefully. You\'92ll have to remember this. Go \
to Paddington Station\'97\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 With a sort of military precision that astonished him, she \
outlined the route that he was to follow. A half-hour railway journey; turn left outside the station; two kilometres along the road; a gate with the top bar missing; a path across a field; a grass-grown lane; a track between bushes; a dead tree with moss on it. It was as though she had a map inside her head. \'91Can you remember all that?\'92 she murmured fi- nally. \
\'91Yes.\'92\uc0\u8232 Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 14 \
\'91You turn left, then right, then left again. And the gate\'92s got no top bar.\'92 \
\'91Yes. What time?\'92 \
\'91About fifteen. You may have to wait. I\'92ll get there by an- other way. Are you sure you remember everything?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Then get away from me as quick as you can.\'92 \
She need not have told him that. But for the moment they could not extricate themselves from the crowd. The trucks were still filing past, the people still insatiably gap- ing. At the start there had been a few boos and hisses, but it came only from the Party members among the crowd, and had soon stopped. The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity. Foreigners, whether from Eurasia or from Easta- sia, were a kind of strange animal. One literally never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even as prison- ers one never got more than a momentary glimpse of them. Nor did one know what became of them, apart from the few who were hanged as war-criminals: the others simply vanished, presumably into forced-labour camps. The round Mogol faces had given way to faces of a more European type, dirty, bearded and exhausted. From over scrubby cheek- bones eyes looked into Winston\'92s, sometimes with strange intensity, and flashed away again. The convoy was drawing to an end. In the last truck he could see an aged man, his face a mass of grizzled hair, standing upright with wrists crossed in front of him, as though he were used to having them bound together. It was almost time for Winston and the girl to part. But at the last moment, while the crowd still \
14 1984 \
hemmed them in, her hand felt for his and gave it a fleeting squeeze. \
It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time that their hands were clasped together. He had time to learn every detail of her hand. He explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, the work-hardened palm with its row of callouses, the smooth flesh under the wrist. Merely from feeling it he would have known it by sight. In the same instant it occurred to him that he did not know what colour the girl\'92s eyes were. They were probably brown, but people with dark hair sometimes had blue eyes. To turn his head and look at her would have been inconceivable folly. With hands locked together, invisible among the press of bodies, they stared steadily in front of them, and instead of the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully at Winston out of nests of hair. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 14 \
Chapter 2 \
\dn32 W\up0 inston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shade, stepping out into pools of gold wher- ever the boughs parted. Under the trees to the left of him \
the ground was misty with bluebells. The air seemed to kiss one\'92s skin. It was the second of May. From somewhere deep- er in the heart of the wood came the droning of ring doves. \
He was a bit early. There had been no difficulties about the journey, and the girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he would normally have been. Presumably she could be trusted to find a safe place. In general you could not assume that you were much safer in the country than in London. There were no telescreens, of course, but there was always the danger of concealed mi- crophones by which your voice might be picked up and recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a journey by yourself without attracting attention. For distances of less than 100 kilometres it was not necessary to get your pass- port endorsed, but sometimes there were patrols hanging about the railway stations, who examined the papers of any Party member they found there and asked awkward ques- tions. However, no patrols had appeared, and on the walk from the station he had made sure by cautious backward glances that he was not being followed. The train was full of proles, in holiday mood because of the summery weather. \
148 1984 \
The wooden-seated carriage in which he travelled was filled to overflowing by a single enormous family, ranging from a toothless great-grandmother to a month-old baby, going out to spend an afternoon with \'91in-laws\'92 in the country, and, as they freely explained to Winston, to get hold of a little blackmarket butter. \
The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the foot- path she had told him of, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes. He had no watch, but it could not be fifteen yet. The bluebells were so thick underfoot that it was impossible not to tread on them. He knelt down and began picking some partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea that he would like to have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they met. He had got together a big bunch and was smelling their faint sickly scent when a sound at his back froze him, the unmistakable crackle of a foot on twigs. He went on picking bluebells. It was the best thing to do. It might be the girl, or he might have been fol- lowed after all. To look round was to show guilt. He picked another and another. A hand fell lightly on his shoulder. \
He looked up. It was the girl. She shook her head, evi- dently as a warning that he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the way along the narrow track into the wood. Obviously she had been that way before, for she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit. Winston fol- lowed, still clasping his bunch of flowers. His first feeling was relief, but as he watched the strong slender body mov- ing in front of him, with the scarlet sash that was just tight enough to bring out the curve of her hips, the sense of his \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 149 \
own inferiority was heavy upon him. Even now it seemed quite likely that when she turned round and looked at him she would draw back after all. The sweetness of the air and the greenness of the leaves daunted him. Already on the walk from the station the May sunshine had made him feel dirty and etiolated, a creature of indoors, with the sooty dust of London in the pores of his skin. It occurred to him that till now she had probably never seen him in broad day- light in the open. They came to the fallen tree that she had spoken of. The girl hopped over and forced apart the bush- es, in which there did not seem to be an opening. When Winston followed her, he found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassy knoll surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely. The girl stopped and turned. \
\'91Here we are,\'92 she said.\uc0\u8232 He was facing her at several paces\'92 distance. As yet he did \
not dare move nearer to her.\uc0\u8232 \'91I didn\'92t want to say anything in the lane,\'92 she went on, \
\'91in case there\'92s a mike hidden there. I don\'92t suppose there is, but there could be. There\'92s always the chance of one of those swine recognizing your voice. We\'92re all right here.\'92 \
He still had not the courage to approach her. \'91We\'92re all right here?\'92 he repeated stupidly. \
\'91Yes. Look at the trees.\'92 They were small ashes, which at some time had been cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none of them thicker than one\'92s wrist. \
\'91There\'92s nothing big enough to hide a mike in. Besides, I\'92ve been here before.\'92 \
They were only making conversation. He had managed 10 1984 \
to move closer to her now. She stood before him very up- right, with a smile on her face that looked faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so slow to act. The bluebells had cascaded on to the ground. They seemed to have fallen of their own accord. He took her hand. \
\'91Would you believe,\'92 he said, \'91that till this moment I didn\'92t know what colour your eyes were?\'92 They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade of brown, with dark lashes. \
\'91Now that you\'92ve seen what I\'92m really like, can you still bear to look at me?\'92 \
\'91Yes, easily.\'92 \
\'91I\'92m thirty-nine years old. I\'92ve got a wife that I can\'92t get rid of. I\'92ve got varicose veins. I\'92ve got five false teeth.\'92 \
\'91I couldn\'92t care less,\'92 said the girl. \
The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was in his his arms. At the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity. The youthful body was strained against his own, the mass of dark hair was against his face, and yes! actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the wide red mouth. She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was calling him darling, precious one, loved one. He had pulled her down on to the ground, she was utterly un- resisting, he could do what he liked with her. But the truth was that he had no physical sensation, except that of mere contact. All he felt was incredulity and pride. He was glad that this was happening, but he had no physical desire. It was too soon, her youth and prettiness had frightened him, he was too much used to living without women\'97he did not know the reason. The girl picked herself up and pulled \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
a bluebell out of her hair. She sat against him, putting her arm round his waist. \
\'91Never mind, dear. There\'92s no hurry. We\'92ve got the whole afternoon. Isn\'92t this a splendid hide-out? I found it when I got lost once on a community hike. If anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away.\'92 \
\'91What is your name?\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 \'91Julia. I know yours. It\'92s Winston\'97Winston Smith.\'92 \'91How did you find that out?\'92\u8232 \'91I expect I\'92m better at finding things out than you are, \
dear. Tell me, what did you think of me before that day I gave you the note?\'92 \
He did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her. It was even a sort of love-offering to start off by telling the worst. \
\'91I hated the sight of you,\'92 he said. \'91I wanted to rape you and then murder you afterwards. Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head in with a cobblestone. If you really want to know, I imagined that you had some- thing to do with the Thought Police.\'92 \
The girl laughed delightedly, evidently taking this as a tribute to the excellence of her disguise. \
\'91Not the Thought Police! You didn\'92t honestly think that?\'92 \
\'91Well, perhaps not exactly that. But from your general appearance\'97merely because you\'92re young and fresh and healthy, you understand\'97I thought that probably\'97\'97\'92 \
\'91You thought I was a good Party member. Pure in word and deed. Banners, processions, slogans, games, commu- nity hikes all that stuff. And you thought that if I had a quarter of a chance I\'92d denounce you as a thought-criminal \
1 1984 \
and get you killed off?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes, something of that kind. A great many young girls \
are like that, you know.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91It\'92s this bloody thing that does it,\'92 she said, ripping off \
the scarlet sash of the Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging it on to a bough. Then, as though touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt in the pocket of her overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate. She broke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston. Even be- fore he had taken it he knew by the smell that it was very unusual chocolate. It was dark and shiny, and was wrapped in silver paper. Chocolate normally was dull-brown crum- bly stuff that tasted, as nearly as one could describe it, like the smoke of a rubbish fire. But at some time or another he had tasted chocolate like the piece she had given him. The first whiff of its scent had stirred up some memory which he could not pin down, but which was powerful and trou- bling. \
\'91Where did you get this stuff?\'92 he said. \
\'91Black market,\'92 she said indifferently. \'91Actually I am that sort of girl, to look at. I\'92m good at games. I was a troop-lead- er in the Spies. I do voluntary work three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League. Hours and hours I\'92ve spent pasting their bloody rot all over London. I always carry one end of a banner in the processions. I always Iook cheer- ful and I never shirk anything. Always yell with the crowd, that\'92s what I say. It\'92s the only way to be safe.\'92 \
The first fragment of chocolate had melted on Win- ston\'92s tongue. The taste was delightful. But there was still \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
that memory moving round the edges of his consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definite shape, like an object seen out of the corner of one\'92s eye. He pushed it away from him, aware only that it was the memory of some action which he would have liked to undo but could not. \
\'91You are very young,\'92 he said. \'91You are ten or fifteen years younger than I am. What could you see to attract you in a man like me?\'92 \
\'91It was something in your face. I thought I\'92d take a chance. I\'92m good at spotting people who don\'92t belong. As soon as I saw you I knew you were against THEM.\'92 \
THEM, it appeared, meant the Party, and above all the Inner Party, about whom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made Winston feel uneasy, although he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere. A thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language. Party members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldom did swear, aloud, at any rate. Julia, however, seemed unable to mention the Party, and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of words that you saw chalked up in dripping alley-ways. He did not dislike it. It was merely one symptom of her revolt against the Party and all its ways, and somehow it seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse that smells bad hay. They had left the clearing and were wandering again through the chequered shade, with their arms round each other\'92s waists whenever it was wide enough to walk two abreast. He noticed how much softer her waist seemed \
14 1984 \
to feel now that the sash was gone. They did not speak above a whisper. Outside the clearing, Julia said, it was better to go quietly. Presently they had reached the edge of the little wood. She stopped him. \
\'91Don\'92t go out into the open. There might be someone watching. We\'92re all right if we keep behind the boughs.\'92 \
They were standing in the shade of hazel bushes. The sunlight, filtering through innumerable leaves, was still hot on their faces. Winston looked out into the field beyond, and underwent a curious, slow shock of recognition. He knew it by sight. An old, closebitten pasture, with a foot- path wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the ragged hedge on the opposite side the boughs of the elm trees swayed just perceptibly in the breeze, and their leaves stirred faintly in dense masses like women\'92s hair. Surely somewhere nearby, but out of sight, there must be a stream with green pools where dace were swimming? \
\'91Isn\'92t there a stream somewhere near here?\'92 he whis- pered. \
\'91That\'92s right, there is a stream. It\'92s at the edge of the next field, actually. There are fish in it, great big ones. You can watch them lying in the pools under the willow trees, wav- ing their tails.\'92 \
\'91It\'92s the Golden Country\'97almost,\'92 he murmured.\uc0\u8232 \'91The Golden Country?\'92\u8232 \'91It\'92s nothing, really. A landscape I\'92ve seen sometimes in \
a dream.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Look!\'92 whispered Julia.\u8232 A thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
almost at the level of their faces. Perhaps it had not seen them. It was in the sun, they in the shade. It spread out its wings, fitted them carefully into place again, ducked its head for a moment, as though making a sort of obeisance to the sun, and then began to pour forth a torrent of song. In the afternoon hush the volume of sound was startling. Win- ston and Julia clung together, fascinated. The music went on and on, minute after minute, with astonishing variations, never once repeating itself, almost as though the bird were deliberately showing off its virtuosity. Sometimes it stopped for a few seconds, spread out and resettled its wings, then swelled its speckled breast and again burst into song. Win- ston watched it with a sort of vague reverence. For whom, for what, was that bird singing? No mate, no rival was watch- ing it. What made it sit at the edge of the lonely wood and pour its music into nothingness? He wondered whether af- ter all there was a microphone hidden somewhere near. He and Julia had spoken only in low whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it would pick up the thrush. Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small, bee- tle-like man was listening intently\'97listening to that. But by degrees the flood of music drove all speculations out of his mind. It was as though it were a kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and got mixed up with the sunlight that filtered through the leaves. He stopped thinking and merely felt. The girl\'92s waist in the bend of his arm was soft and warm. He pulled her round so that they were breast to breast; her body seemed to melt into his. Wherever his hands moved it was all as yielding as water. Their mouths \
1 1984 \
clung together; it was quite different from the hard kisses they had exchanged earlier. When they moved their faces apart again both of them sighed deeply. The bird took fright and fled with a clatter of wings. \
Winston put his lips against her ear. \'91NOW,\'92 he whis- pered. \
\'91Not here,\'92 she whispered back. \'91Come back to the hide- out. It\'92s safer.\'92 \
Quickly, with an occasional crackle of twigs, they threaded their way back to the clearing. When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned and faced him. \
They were both breathing fast, but the smile had reappeared round the corners of her mouth. She stood looking at him for an instant, then felt at the zipper of her overalls. And, yes! it was almost as in his dream. Almost as swiftly as he had imagined it, she had torn her clothes off, and when she flung them aside it was with that same magnificent gesture by which a whole civilization seemed to be annihilated. Her body gleamed white in the sun. But for a moment he did not look at her body; his eyes were anchored by the freckled face with its faint, bold smile. He knelt down before her and took her hands in his. \
\'91Have you done this before?\'92 \
\'91Of course. Hundreds of times\'97well, scores of times, a n y w a y.\'92 \
\'91With Party members?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes, always with Party members.\'92\u8232 \'91With members of the Inner Party?\'92\u8232 \'91Not with those swine, no. But there\'92s plenty that WOULD \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
if they got half a chance. They\'92re not so holy as they make out.\'92 \
His heart leapt. Scores of times she had done it: he wished it had been hundreds\'97thousands. Anything that hinted at corruption always filled him with a wild hope. Who knew, perhaps the Party was rotten under the surface, its cult of strenuousness and self-denial simply a sham concealing in- iquity. If he could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy or syphilis, how gladly he would have done so! Any- thing to rot, to weaken, to undermine! He pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face. \
\'91Listen. The more men you\'92ve had, the more I love you. Do you understand that?\'92 \
\'91Yes, perfectly.\'92 \
\'91I hate purity, I hate goodness! I don\'92t want any virtue to exist anywhere. I want everyone to be corrupt to the bones.\'92 \
\'91Well then, I ought to suit you, dear. I\'92m corrupt to the bones.\'92 \
\'91You like doing this? I don\'92t mean simply me: I mean the thing in itself?\'92 \
\'91I adore it.\'92 \
That was above all what he wanted to hear. Not merely the love of one person but the animal instinct, the simple undifferentiated desire: that was the force that would tear the Party to pieces. He pressed her down upon the grass, among the fallen bluebells. This time there was no difficul- ty. Presently the rising and falling of their breasts slowed to normal speed, and in a sort of pleasant helplessness they \
18 1984 \
fell apart. The sun seemed to have grown hotter. They were both sleepy. He reached out for the discarded overalls and pulled them partly over her. Almost immediately they fell asleep and slept for about half an hour. \
Winston woke first. He sat up and watched the freck- led face, still peacefully asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand. Except for her mouth, you could not call her beauti- ful. There was a line or two round the eyes, if you looked closely. The short dark hair was extraordinarily thick and soft. It occurred to him that he still did not know her sur- name or where she lived. \
The young, strong body, now helpless in sleep, awoke in him a pitying, protecting feeling. But the mindless tender- ness that he had felt under the hazel tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come back. He pulled the over- alls aside and studied her smooth white flank. In the old days, he thought, a man looked at a girl\'92s body and saw that it was desirable, and that was the end of the story. But you could not have pure love or pure lust nowadays. No emo- tion was pure, because everything was mixed up with fear and hatred. Their embrace had been a battle, the climax a victory. It was a blow struck against the Party. It was a po- litical act. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
Chapter 3 \
\dn32 \'91\up0 We can come here once again,\'92 said Julia. \'91It\'92s generally safe to use any hide-out twice. But not for another month or two, of course.\'92 \
As soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed. She became alert and business-like, put her clothes on, knot- ted the scarlet sash about her waist, and began arranging the details of the journey home. It seemed natural to leave this to her. She obviously had a practical cunning which Winston lacked, and she seemed also to have an exhaus- tive knowledge of the countryside round London, stored away from innumerable community hikes. The route she gave him was quite different from the one by which he had come, and brought him out at a different railway station. \
\'91Never go home the same way as you went out,\'92 she said, as though enunciating an important general principle. She would leave first, and Winston was to wait half an hour be- fore following her. \
She had named a place where they could meet after work, four evenings hence. It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was an open market which was gener- ally crowded and noisy. She would be hanging about among the stalls, pretending to be in search of shoelaces or sewing- thread. If she judged that the coast was clear she would blow her nose when he approached; otherwise he was to walk \
10 1984 \
past her without recognition. But with luck, in the middle of the crowd, it would be safe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange another meeting. \
\'91And now I must go,\'92 she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions. \'91I\'92m due back at nineteen-thirty. I\'92ve got to put in two hours for the Junior Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something. Isn\'92t it bloody? Give me a brush- down, would you? Have I got any twigs in my hair? Are you sure? Then good-bye, my love, good-bye!\'92 \
She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost vi- olently, and a moment later pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wood with very little noise. Even now he had not found out her surname or her address. However, it made no difference, for it was incon- ceivable that they could ever meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication. \
As it happened, they never went back to the clearing in the wood. During the month of May there was only one further occasion on which they actually succeeded in mak- ing love. That was in another hidlng-place known to Julia, the belfry of a ruinous church in an almost-deserted stretch of country where an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier. It was a good hiding-place when once you got there, but the getting there was very dangerous. For the rest they could meet only in the streets, in a different place every eve- ning and never for more than half an hour at a time. In the street it was usually possible to talk, after a fashion. As they drifted down the crowded pavements, not quite abreast and never looking at one another, they carried on a curi- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
ous, intermittent conversation which flicked on and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly nipped into silence by the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a tele- screen, then taken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence, then abruptly cut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost without introduction on the following day. Julia appeared to be quite used to this kind of conversation, which she called \'91talking by instal- ments\'92. She was also surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips. Just once in almost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss. They were pass- ing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak when they were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, the earth heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found himself lying on his side, bruised and terrified. A rocket bomb must have dropped quite near at hand. Suddenly he became aware of Julia\'92s face a few centi- metres from his own, deathly white, as white as chalk. Even her lips were white. She was dead! He clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a live warm face. But there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of his lips. Both of their faces were thickly coated with plaster. \
There were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had to walk past one another without a sign, be- cause a patrol had just come round the corner or a helicopter was hovering overhead. Even if it had been less dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meet. Win- ston\'92s working week was sixty hours, Julia\'92s was even longer, and their free days varied according to the pressure of work \
1 1984 \
and did not often coincide. Julia, in any case, seldom had an evening completely free. She spent an astonishing amount of time in attending lectures and demonstrations, distrib- uting literature for the junior Anti-Sex League, preparing banners for Hate Week, making collections for the savings campaign, and such-like activities. It paid, she said, it was camouflage. If you kept the small rules, you could break the big ones. She even induced Winston to mortgage yet an- other of his evenings by enrolling himself for the part-time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous Par- ty members. So, one evening every week, Winston spent four hours of paralysing boredom, screwing together small bits of metal which were probably parts of bomb fuses, in a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the knocking of hammers mingled drearily with the music of the telescreens. \
When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentary conversation were filled up. It was a blazing af- ternoon. The air in the little square chamber above the bells was hot and stagnant, and smelt overpoweringly of pigeon dung. They sat talking for hours on the dusty, twig-littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time to cast a glance through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming. \
Julia was twenty-six years old. She lived in a hostel with thirty other girls (\'92Always in the stink of women! How I hate women!\'92 she said parenthetically), and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writing machines in the Fic- tion Department. She enjoyed her work, which consisted chiefly in running and servicing a powerful but tricky elec- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
tric motor. She was \'91not clever\'92, but was fond of using her hands and felt at home with machinery. She could describe the whole process of composing a novel, from the general directive issued by the Planning Committee down to the final touching-up by the Rewrite Squad. But she was not in- terested in the finished product. She \'91didn\'92t much care for reading,\'92 she said. Books were just a commodity that had to be produced, like jam or bootlaces. \
She had no memories of anything before the early six- ties and the only person she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the Revolution was a grand- father who had disappeared when she was eight. At school she had been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnastics trophy two years running. She had been a troop- leader in the Spies and a branch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Sex League. She had always borne an excellent character. She had even (an infal- lible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornosec, the sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheap pornography for distribution among the proles. It was nicknamed Muck House by the people who worked in it, she remarked. There she had remained for a year, helping to produce booklets in sealed packets with ti- tles like \'91Spanking Stories\'92 or \'91One Night in a Girls\'92 School\'92, to be bought furtively by proletarian youths who were un- der the impression that they were buying something illegal. \
\'91What are these books like?\'92 said Winston curiously. \
\'91Oh, ghastly rubbish. They\'92re boring, really. They only have six plots, but they swap them round a bit. Of course \
14 1984 \
I was only on the kaleidoscopes. I was never in the Rewrite Squad. I\'92m not literary, dear\'97not even enough for that.\'92 \
He learned with astonishment that all the workers in Pornosec, except the heads of the departments, were girls. The theory was that men, whose sex instincts were less con- trollable than those of women, were in greater danger of being corrupted by the filth they handled. \
\'91They don\'92t even like having married women there,\'92 she added. Girls are always supposed to be so pure. Here\'92s one who isn\'92t, anyway. \
She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party member of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest. \'91And a good job too,\'92 said Julia, \'91otherwise they\'92d have had my name out of him when he confessed.\'92 Since then there had been various others. Life as she saw it was quite simple. You wanted a good time; \'91they\'92, meaning the Party, wanted to stop you having it; you broke the rules as best you could. She seemed to think it just as natural that \
\'91they\'92 should want to rob you of your pleasures as that you should want to avoid being caught. She hated the Party, and said so in the crudest words, but she made no general criti- cism of it. Except where it touched upon her own life she had no interest in Party doctrine. He noticed that she never used Newspeak words except the ones that had passed into everyday use. She had never heard of the Brotherhood, and refused to believe in its existence. Any kind of organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure, struck her as stupid. The clever thing was to break the rules and stay alive all the same. He wondered vaguely how many \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
others like her there might be in the younger generation people who had grown up in the world of the Revolution, knowing nothing else, accepting the Party as something unalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against its authority but simply evading it, as a rabbit dodges a dog. \
They did not discuss the possibility of getting married. It was too remote to be worth thinking about. No imagin- able committee would ever sanction such a marriage even if Katharine, Winston\'92s wife, could somehow have been got rid of. It was hopeless even as a daydream. \
\'91What was she like, your wife?\'92 said Julia. \
\'91She was\'97do you know the Newspeak word GOOD- THINKFUL? Meaning naturally orthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought?\'92 \
\'91No, I didn\'92t know the word, but I know the kind of per- son, right enough.\'92 \
He began telling her the story of his married life, but cu- riously enough she appeared to know the essential parts of it already. She described to him, almost as though she had seen or felt it, the stiffening of Katharine\'92s body as soon as he touched her, the way in which she still seemed to be pushing him from her with all her strength, even when her arms were clasped tightly round him. With Julia he felt no difficulty in talking about such things: Katharine, in any case, had long ceased to be a painful memory and became merely a distasteful one. \
\'91I could have stood it if it hadn\'92t been for one thing,\'92 he said. He told her about the frigid little ceremony that Kath- arine had forced him to go through on the same night every \
1 1984 \
week. \'91She hated it, but nothing would make her stop doing it. She used to call it\'97but you\'92ll never guess.\'92 \
\'91Our duty to the Party,\'92 said Julia promptly.\uc0\u8232 \'91How did you know that?\'92\u8232 \'91I\'92ve been at school too, dear. Sex talks once a month for \
the over-sixteens. And in the Youth Movement. They rub it into you for years. I dare say it works in a lot of cases. But of course you can never tell; people are such hypocrites.\'92 \
She began to enlarge upon the subject. With Julia, every- thing came back to her own sexuality. As soon as this was touched upon in any way she was capable of great acuteness. Unlike Winston, she had grasped the inner meaning of the Party\'92s sexual puritanism. It was not merely that the sex instinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party\'92s control and which therefore had to be destroyed if possible. What was more important was that sexual priva- tion induced hysteria, which was desirable because it could be transformed into war-fever and leader-worship. The way she put it was: \
\'91When you make love you\'92re using up energy; and after- wards you feel happy and don\'92t give a damn for anything. They can\'92t bear you to feel like that. They want you to be bursting with energy all the time. All this marching up and down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour. If you\'92re happy inside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brother and the Three-Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest of their bloody rot?\'92 \
That was very true, he thought. There was a direct inti- mate connexion between chastity and political orthodoxy. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
For how could the fear, the hatred, and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in its members be kept at the right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instinct and using it as a driving force? The sex impulse was dangerous to the Party, and the Party had turned it to account. They had played a similar trick with the instinct of parenthood. The family could not actually be abolished, and, indeed, people were encouraged to be fond of their children, in almost the old-fashioned way. The children, on the other hand, were systematically turned against their parents and taught to spy on them and report their deviations. The family had become in effect an extension of the Thought Police. It was a device by means of which everyone could be surrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately. \
Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine. Katharine would unquestionably have denounced him to the Thought Police if she had not happened to be too stupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions. But what really recalled her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, which had brought the sweat out on his forehead. He began telling Julia of something that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on another sweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago. \
It was three or four months after they were married. They had lost their way on a community hike somewhere in Kent. They had only lagged behind the others for a couple of min- \
utes, but they took a wrong turning, and presently found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk quarry. It was a sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with \
18 1984 \
boulders at the bottom. There was nobody of whom they could ask the way. As soon as she realized that they were lost Katharine became very uneasy. To be away from the noisy mob of hikers even for a moment gave her a feeling of wrong-doing. She wanted to hurry back by the way they had come and start searching in the other direction. But at this moment Winston noticed some tufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of the cliff beneath them. One tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, apparently growing on the same root. He had never seen anything of the kind before, and he called to Katharine to come and look at it. \
\'91Look, Katharine! Look at those flowers. That clump down near the bottom. Do you see they\'92re two different co- lours?\'92 \
She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back for a moment. She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was pointing. He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand on her waist to steady her. \
At this moment it suddenly occurred to him how completely alone they were. There was not a human creature anywhere, not a leaf stirring, not even a bird awake. In a place like this the danger that there would be a hidden microphone was very small, and even if there was a microphone it would only pick up sounds. It was the hottest sleepiest hour of the afternoon. The sun blazed down upon them, the sweat tick- led his face. And the thought struck him... \
\'91Why didn\'92t you give her a good shove?\'92 said Julia. \'91I would have.\'92 \
\'91Yes, dear, you would have. I would, if I\'92d been the same Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
person then as I am now. Or perhaps I would\'97I\'92m not cer- tain.\'92 \
\'91Are you sorry you didn\'92t?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes. On the whole I\'92m sorry I didn\'92t.\'92\u8232 They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor. He \
pulled her closer against him. Her head rested on his shoul- der, the pleasant smell of her hair conquering the pigeon dung. She was very young, he thought, she still expected something from life, she did not understand that to push an inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing. \
\'91Actually it would have made no difference,\'92 he said. \'91Then why are you sorry you didn\'92t do it?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Only because I prefer a positive to a negative. In this \
game that we\'92re playing, we can\'92t win. Some kinds of failure are better than other kinds, that\'92s all.\'92 \
He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent. She al- ways contradicted him when he said anything of this kind. She would not accept it as a law of nature that the individ- ual is always defeated. In a way she realized that she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would catch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believed that it was somehow possible to construct a se- cret world in which you could live as you chose. All you needed was luck and cunning and boldness. She did not un- derstand that there was no such thing as happiness, that the only victory lay in the far future, long after you were dead, that from the moment of declaring war on the Party it was better to think of yourself as a corpse. \
10 \
1984 \
\'91We are the dead,\'92 he said. \
\'91We\'92re not dead yet,\'92 said Julia prosaically. \
\'91Not physically. Six months, a year\'97five years, conceiv- ably. I am afraid of death. You are young, so presumably you\'92re more afraid of it than I am. Obviously we shall put it off as long as we can. But it makes very little difference. So long as human beings stay human, death and life are the same thing.\'92 \
\'91Oh, rubbish! Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton? Don\'92t you enjoy being alive? Don\'92t you like feel- ing: This is me, this is my hand, this is my leg, I\'92m real, I\'92m solid, I\'92m alive! Don\'92t you like THIS?\'92 \
She twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him. He could feel her breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls. Her body seemed to be pouring some of its youth and vigour into his. \
\'91Yes, I like that,\'92 he said. \
\'91Then stop talking about dying. And now listen, dear, we\'92ve got to fix up about the next time we meet. We may as well go back to the place in the wood. We\'92ve given it a good long rest. But you must get there by a different way this time. I\'92ve got it all planned out. You take the train\'97but look, I\'92ll draw it out for you.\'92 \
And in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust, and with a twig from a pigeon\'92s nest began drawing a map on the floor. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
Chapter 4 \
\dn32 W\up0 inston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrington\'92s shop. Beside the window the enormous bed was made up, with ragged blankets and a coverless bol- \
ster. The old-fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece. In the corner, on the gate- leg table, the glass paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out of the half-darkness. \
In the fender was a battered tin oilstove, a saucepan, and two cups, provided by Mr Charrington. Winston lit the burner and set a pan of water to boil. He had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and some saccharine tablets. \
The clock\'92s hands said seventeen-twenty: it was nineteen- twenty really. She was coming at nineteen-thirty. \
Folly, folly, his heart kept saying: conscious, gratuitous, suicidal folly. Of all the crimes that a Party member could commit, this one was the least possible to conceal. Actu- ally the idea had first floated into his head in the form of a vision, of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surface of the gateleg table. As he had foreseen, Mr Charrington had made no difficulty about letting the room. He was obviously glad of the few dollars that it would bring him. Nor did he seem shocked or become offensively knowing when it was made clear that Winston wanted the room for the purpose of a love-affair. Instead he looked into the middle distance \
1 1984 \
and spoke in generalities, with so delicate an air as to give the impression that he had become partly invisible. Privacy, he said, was a very valuable thing. Everyone wanted a place where they could be alone occasionally. And when they had such a place, it was only common courtesy in anyone else who knew of it to keep his knowledge to himself. He even, seeming almost to fade out of existence as he did so, add- ed that there were two entries to the house, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley. \
Under the window somebody was singing. Winston peeped out, secure in the protection of the muslin curtain. The June sun was still high in the sky, and in the sun-filled \
court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Norman pil- lar, with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her middle, was stumping to and fro between a wash- tub and a clothes line, pegging out a series of square white things which Winston recognized as babies\'92 diapers. When- ever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she was singing in a powerful contralto: \
It was only an \'91opeless fancy.\uc0\u8232 It passed like an Ipril dye,\u8232 But a look an\'92 a word an\'92 the dreams they stirred! They \'91ave\u8232 stolen my \'91eart awye! \
The tune had been haunting London for weeks past. It was one of countless similar songs published for the ben- efit of the proles by a sub-section of the Music Department. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
The words of these songs were composed without any hu- man intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator. But the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an almost pleasant sound. He could hear the woman singing and the scrape of her shoes on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the street, and somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traffic, and yet the room seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of a telescreen. \
Folly, folly, folly! he thought again. It was inconceiv- able that they could frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught. But the temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors and near at hand, had been too much for both of them. For some time after their visit to the church belfry it had been impossible to arrange meetings. Working hours had been drastically increased in anticipation of Hate Week. It was more than a month distant, but the enormous, complex preparations that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybody. Finally both of them managed to secure a free afternoon on the same day. They had agreed to go back to the clearing in the wood. On the evening beforehand they met briefly in the street. As usual, Winston hardly looked at Julia as they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from the short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was paler than usual. \
\'91It\'92s all off,\'92 she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak. \'91Tomorrow, I mean.\'92 \
14 \
1984 \
\'91What?\'92 \
\'91Tomorrow afternoon. I can\'92t come.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Why not?\'92\u8232 \'91Oh, the usual reason. It\'92s started early this time.\'92 \
For a moment he was violently angry. During the month that he had known her the nature of his desire for her had changed. At the beginning there had been little true sensu- ality in it. Their first love-making had been simply an act of the will. But after the second time it was different. The smell of her hair, the taste of her mouth, the feeling of her skin seemed to have got inside him, or into the air all round him. She had become a physical necessity, something that he not only wanted but felt that he had a right to. When she said that she could not come, he had the feeling that she was cheating him. But just at this moment the crowd pressed them together and their hands accidentally met. She gave the tips of his fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to in- vite not desire but affection. It struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointment must be a normal, recurring event; and a deep tenderness, such as he had not felt for her before, suddenly took hold of him. He wished that they were a married couple of ten years\'92 stand- ing. He wished that he were walking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly and with- out fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the household. He wished above all that they had some place where they could be alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every time they met. It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on the following day, that the idea of renting Mr Charrington\'92s room had oc- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
curred to him. When he suggested it to Julia she had agreed with unexpected readiness. Both of them knew that it was lunacy. It was as though they were intentionally stepping nearer to their graves. As he sat waiting on the edge of the bed he thought again of the cellars of the Ministry of Love. It was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one\'92s consciousness. There it lay, fixed in future times, preceding death as surely as 99 precedes 100. One could not avoid it, but one could perhaps postpone it: and yet instead, every now and again, by a conscious, wilful act, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened. \
At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs. Julia burst into the room. She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he had sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry. He started forward to take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly, partly because she was still holding the tool-bag. \
\'91Half a second,\'92 she said. \'91Just let me show you what I\'92ve brought. Did you bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee? I thought you would. You can chuck it away again, because we shan\'92t be needing it. Look here.\'92 \
She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spanners and a screwdriver that filled the top part of it. Underneath were a number of neat paper packets. The first packet that she passed to Winston had a strange and yet vaguely familiar feeling. It was filled with some kind of heavy, sand-like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it. \
1 \
1984 \
\'91It isn\'92t sugar?\'92 he said. \
\'91Real sugar. Not saccharine, sugar. And here\'92s a loaf of bread\'97proper white bread, not our bloody stuff\'97and a lit- tle pot of jam. And here\'92s a tin of milk\'97but look! This is the one I\'92m really proud of. I had to wrap a bit of sacking round it, because\'97\'97\'92 \
But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up. The smell was already filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation from his early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with even now, blow- ing down a passage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing itself mysteriously in a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then lost again. \
\'91It\'92s coffee,\'92 he murmured, \'91real coffee.\'92 \
\'91It\'92s Inner Party coffee. There\'92s a whole kilo here,\'92 she said. \
\'91How did you manage to get hold of all these things?\'92 \
\'91It\'92s all Inner Party stuff. There\'92s nothing those swine don\'92t have, nothing. But of course waiters and servants and people pinch things, and\'97look, I got a little packet of tea as well.\'92 \
Winston had squatted down beside her. He tore open a corner of the packet. \
\'91It\'92s real tea. Not blackberry leaves.\'92 \
\'91There\'92s been a lot of tea about lately. They\'92ve captured In- dia, or something,\'92 she said vaguely. \'91But listen, dear. I want you to turn your back on me for three minutes. Go and sit on the other side of the bed. Don\'92t go too near the window. \
And don\'92t turn round till I tell you.\'92\uc0\u8232 Winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
Down in the yard the red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and the line. She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep feeling: \
They sye that time \'91eals all things,\uc0\u8232 They sye you can always forget;\u8232 But the smiles an\'92 the tears acrorss the years They twist my \
\'91eart-strings yet! \
She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed. Her voice floated upward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort of happy melancholy. One had the feeling that she would have been perfectly content, if the June evening had been endless and the supply of clothes in- exhaustible, to remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapers and singing rubbish. It struck him as a curious fact that he had never heard a member of the Party singing alone and spontaneously. It would even have seemed slightly unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking to one- self. Perhaps it was only when people were somewhere near the starvation level that they had anything to sing about. \
\'91You can turn round now,\'92 said Julia.\uc0\u8232 He turned round, and for a second almost failed to rec- \
ognize her. What he had actually expected was to see her naked. But she was not naked. The transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that. She had painted her face. \
She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian 18 1984 \
quarters and bought herself a complete set of make-up ma- terials. Her lips were deeply reddened, her cheeks rouged, her nose powdered; there was even a touch of something under the eyes to make them brighter. It was not very skil- fully done, but Winston\'92s standards in such matters were not high. He had never before seen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on her face. The improvement in her appearance was startling. With just a few dabs of colour in the right places she had become not only very much pret- tier, but, above all, far more feminine. Her short hair and boyish overalls merely added to the effect. As he took her in his arms a wave of synthetic violets flooded his nostrils. He remembered the half-darkness of a basement kitchen, and a woman\'92s cavernous mouth. It was the very same scent that she had used; but at the moment it did not seem to matter. \
\'91Scent too!\'92 he said. \
\'91Yes, dear, scent too. And do you know what I\'92m going to do next? I\'92m going to get hold of a real woman\'92s frock from somewhere and wear it instead of these bloody trousers. I\'92ll wear silk stockings and high-heeled shoes! In this room I\'92m going to be a woman, not a Party comrade.\'92 \
They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed. It was the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence. Until now he had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body, with the vari- cose veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patch over his ankle. There were no sheets, but the blanket they lay on was threadbare and smooth, and the size and springiness of the bed astonished both of them. \'91It\'92s sure \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
to be full of bugs, but who cares?\'92 said Julia. One never saw a double bed nowadays, except in the homes of the proles. Winston had occasionally slept in one in his boyhood: Julia had never been in one before, so far as she could remember. \
Presently they fell asleep for a little while. When Win- ston woke up the hands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine. He did not stir, because Julia was sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm. Most of her make-up had transferred itself to his own face or the bolster, but a light stain of rouge still brought out the beauty of her cheekbone. \
A yellow ray from the sinking sun fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up the fireplace, where the water in the pan was boiling fast. Down in the yard the woman had stopped singing, but the faint shouts of children floated in from the street. He wondered vaguely whether in the abolished past it had been a normal experience to lie in bed like this, in the cool of a summer evening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, making love when they chose, talking of what they chose, not feeling any compulsion to get up, simply ly- ing there and listening to peaceful sounds outside. Surely there could never have been a time when that seemed ordi- nary? Julia woke up, rubbed her eyes, and raised herself on her elbow to look at the oilstove. \
\'91Half that water\'92s boiled away,\'92 she said. \'91I\'92ll get up and make some coffee in another moment. We\'92ve got an hour. What time do they cut the lights off at your flats?\'92 \
\'91Twenty-three thirty.\'92 \
\'91It\'92s twenty-three at the hostel. But you have to get in ear- lier than that, because\'97Hi! Get out, you filthy brute!\'92 \
180 1984 \
She suddenly twisted herself over in the bed, seized a shoe from the floor, and sent it hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm, exactly as he had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning during the Two Min- utes Hate. \
\'91What was it?\'92 he said in surprise. \
\'91A rat. I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wain- scoting. There\'92s a hole down there. I gave him a good fright, a n y w a y.\'92 \
\'91Rats!\'92 murmured Winston. \'91In this room!\'92 \
\'91They\'92re all over the place,\'92 said Julia indifferently as she lay down again. \'91We\'92ve even got them in the kitchen at the hostel. Some parts of London are swarming with them. Did you know they attack children? Yes, they do. In some of these streets a woman daren\'92t leave a baby alone for two minutes. It\'92s the great huge brown ones that do it. And the nasty thing is that the brutes always\'97\'97\'92 \
\'91DON\'92T GO ON!\'92 said Winston, with his eyes tightly shut. \
\'91Dearest! You\'92ve gone quite pale. What\'92s the matter? Do they make you feel sick?\'92 \
\'91Of all horrors in the world\'97a rat!\'92\uc0\u8232 She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs \
round him, as though to reassure him with the warmth of her body. He did not reopen his eyes immediately. For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a nightmare which had recurred from time to time through- out his life. It was always very much the same. He was standing in front of a wall of darkness, and on the other \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 181 \
side of it there was something unendurable, something too dreadful to be faced. In the dream his deepest feeling was always one of self-deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of darkness. With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his own brain, he could even have dragged the thing into the open. He always woke up without discovering what it was: but somehow it was con- nected with what Julia had been saying when he cut her short. \
\'91I\'92m sorry,\'92 he said, \'91it\'92s nothing. I don\'92t like rats, that\'92s all.\'92 \
\'91Don\'92t worry, dear, we\'92re not going to have the filthy brutes in here. I\'92ll stuff the hole with a bit of sacking before we go. And next time we come here I\'92ll bring some plaster and bung it up properly.\'92 \
Already the black instant of panic was half-forgotten. Feeling slightly ashamed of himself, he sat up against the bedhead. Julia got out of bed, pulled on her overalls, and made the coffee. The smell that rose from the saucepan was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest anybody outside should notice it and become inquisitive. What was even better than the taste of the coffee was the silky texture given to it by the sugar, a thing Winston had almost forgotten after years of saccharine. With one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the other, Ju- lia wandered about the room, glancing indifferently at the bookcase, pointing out the best way of repairing the gate- leg table, plumping herself down in the ragged arm-chair to see if it was comfortable, and examining the absurd twelve- \
18 1984 \
hour clock with a sort of tolerant amusement. She brought the glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a better light. He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by the soft, rainwatery appearance of the glass. \
\'91What is it, do you think?\'92 said Julia. \
\'91I don\'92t think it\'92s anything\'97I mean, I don\'92t think it was ever put to any use. That\'92s what I like about it. It\'92s a little chunk of history that they\'92ve forgotten to alter. It\'92s a mes- sage from a hundred years ago, if one knew how to read it.\'92 \
\'91And that picture over there\'92\'97she nodded at the engrav- ing on the opposite wall\'97\'92would that be a hundred years old?\'92 \
\'91More. Two hundred, I dare say. One can\'92t tell. It\'92s impos- sible to discover the age of anything nowadays.\'92 \
She went over to look at it. \'91Here\'92s where that brute stuck his nose out,\'92 she said, kicking the wainscoting immediate- ly below the picture. \'91What is this place? I\'92ve seen it before somewhere.\'92 \
\'91It\'92s a church, or at least it used to be. St Clement Danes its name was.\'92 The fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrington had taught him came back into his head, and he added half-nostalgically: \'91Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s!\'92 \
To his astonishment she capped the line: \
\'92You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin\'92s, When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey\'97\'97\'92 \
\'91I can\'92t remember how it goes on after that. But anyway Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 18 \
I remember it ends up, \'91Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head!\'91\'91 \
It was like the two halves of a countersign. But there must be another line after \'91the bells of Old Bailey\'92. Perhaps it could be dug out of Mr Charrington\'92s memory, if he were suitably prompted. \
\'91Who taught you that?\'92 he said. \
\'91My grandfather. He used to say it to me when I was a lit- tle girl. He was vaporized when I was eight\'97at any rate, he disappeared. I wonder what a lemon was,\'92 she added incon- sequently. \'91I\'92ve seen oranges. They\'92re a kind of round yellow fruit with a thick skin.\'92 \
\'91I can remember lemons,\'92 said Winston. \'91They were quite common in the fifties. They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell them.\'92 \
\'91I bet that picture\'92s got bugs behind it,\'92 said Julia. \'91I\'92ll take it down and give it a good clean some day. I suppose it\'92s almost time we were leaving. I must start washing this paint off. What a bore! I\'92ll get the lipstick off your face af- terwards.\'92 \
Winston did not get up for a few minutes more. The room was darkening. He turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight. The inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the in- terior of the glass itself. There was such a depth of it, and yet it was almost as transparent as air. It was as though the surface of the glass had been the arch of the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere complete. He had the feel- ing that he could get inside it, and that in fact he was inside \
184 1984 \
it, along with the mahogany bed and the gateleg table, and the clock and the steel engraving and the paperweight itself. The paperweight was the room he was in, and the coral was Julia\'92s life and his own, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart \
of the crystal. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 18 \
Chapter 5 \
\dn32 S\up0 yme had vanished. A morning came, and he was miss- ing from work: a few thoughtless people commented on his absence. On the next day nobody mentioned him. On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of the Re- cords Department to look at the notice-board. One of the notices carried a printed list of the members of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme had been one. It looked almost exactly as it had looked before\'97nothing had been crossed out\'97but it was one name shorter. It was enough. Syme had ceased to exist: he had never existed. \
The weather was baking hot. In the labyrinthine Ministry the windowless, air-conditioned rooms kept their normal temperature, but outside the pavements scorched one\'92s feet and the stench of the Tubes at the rush hours was a hor- ror. The preparations for Hate Week were in full swing, and the staffs of all the Ministries were working overtime. Pro- cessions, meetings, military parades, lectures, waxworks, displays, film shows, telescreen programmes all had to be organized; stands had to be erected, effigies built, slogans coined, songs written, rumours circulated, photographs faked. Julia\'92s unit in the Fiction Department had been tak- en off the production of novels and was rushing out a series of atrocity pamphlets. Winston, in addition to his regular work, spent long periods every day in going through back \
18 1984 \
files of \'91The Times\'92 and altering and embellishing news items which were to be quoted in speeches. Late at night, when crowds of rowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a curiously febrile air. The rocket bombs crashed of- tener than ever, and sometimes in the far distance there were enormous explosions which no one could explain and about which there were wild rumours. \
The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate Song, it was called) had already been com- posed and was being endlessly plugged on the telescreens. It had a savage, barking rhythm which could not exactly be called music, but resembled the beating of a drum. Roared out by hundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying. The proles had taken a fancy to it, and in the midnight streets it competed with the still-popular \'91It was only a hopeless fancy\'92. The Parsons children played it at all hours of the night and day, unbearably, on a comb and a piece of toilet paper. Winston\'92s evenings were fuller than \
ever. Squads of volunteers, organized by Parsons, were pre- paring the street for Hate Week, stitching banners, painting posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, and perilously sling- ing wires across the street for the reception of streamers. Parsons boasted that Victory Mansions alone would display four hundred metres of bunting. He was in his native ele- ment and as happy as a lark. The heat and the manual work had even given him a pretext for reverting to shorts and an open shirt in the evenings. He was everywhere at once, pushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, jolly- ing everyone along with comradely exhortations and giving \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 18 \
out from every fold of his body what seemed an inexhaust- ible supply of acrid-smelling sweat. \
A new poster had suddenly appeared all over London. It had no caption, and represented simply the monstrous fig- ure of a Eurasian soldier, three or four metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian face and enor- mous boots, a submachine gun pointed from his hip. From whatever angle you looked at the poster, the muzzle of the gun, magnified by the foreshortening, seemed to be point- ed straight at you. The thing had been plastered on every blank space on every wall, even outnumbering the por- traits of Big Brother. The proles, normally apathetic about the war, were being lashed into one of their periodical fren- zies of patriotism. As though to harmonize with the general mood, the rocket bombs had been killing larger numbers of people than usual. One fell on a crowded film theatre in Stepney, burying several hundred victims among the ruins. \
The whole population of the neighbourhood turned out for a long, trailing funeral which went on for hours and was in effect an indignation meeting. Another bomb fell on a piece of waste ground which was used as a playground and sever- al dozen children were blown to pieces. There were further angry demonstrations, Goldstein was burned in effigy, hun- dreds of copies of the poster of the Eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames, and a number of shops were looted in the turmoil; then a rumour flew round that spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves, and an old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had their house set on fire and perished \
188 1984 \
of suffocation.\uc0\u8232 In the room over Mr Charrington\'92s shop, when they could \
get there, Julia and Winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open window, naked for the sake of coolness. The rat had never come back, but the bugs had multiplied hideously in the heat. It did not seem to matter. Dirty or clean, the room was paradise. As soon as they arrived they would sprinkle everything with pepper bought on the black market, tear off their clothes, and make love with sweating bodies, then fall asleep and wake to find that the bugs had \
rallied and were massing for the counter-attack.\uc0\u8232 Four, five, six\'97seven times they met during the month of June. Winston had dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours. He seemed to have lost the need for it. He had grown fatter, his varicose ulcer had subsided, leaving only \
a brown stain on the skin above his ankle, his fits of cough- ing in the early morning had stopped. The process of life had ceased to be intolerable, he had no longer any impulse to make faces at the telescreen or shout curses at the top of his voice. Now that they had a secure hiding-place, almost a home, it did not even seem a hardship that they could only meet infrequently and for a couple of hours at a time. What mattered was that the room over the junk-shop should exist. To know that it was there, inviolate, was almost the same as being in it. The room was a world, a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walk. Mr Charrington, thought Win- ston, was another extinct animal. He usually stopped to talk with Mr Charrington for a few minutes on his way upstairs. The old man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 189 \
and on the other hand to have almost no customers. He led a ghostlike existence between the tiny, dark shop, and an even tinier back kitchen where he prepared his meals and which contained, among other things, an unbelievably ancient gramophone with an enormous horn. He seemed glad of the opportunity to talk. Wandering about among his worthless stock, with his long nose and thick spectacles and his bowed shoulders in the velvet jacket, he had always vaguely the air of being a collector rather than a tradesman. With a sort of faded enthusiasm he would finger this scrap of rubbish or that\'97a china bottle-stopper, the painted lid of a broken snuffbox, a pinchbeck locket containing a strand of some long-dead baby\'92s hair\'97never asking that Winston should buy it, merely that he should admire it. To talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn-out musical- box. He had dragged out from the corners of his memory some more fragments of forgotten rhymes. There was one about four and twenty blackbirds, and another about a cow with a crumpled horn, and another about the death of poor Cock Robin. \'91It just occurred to me you might be interested,\'92 he would say with a deprecating little laugh whenever he produced a new fragment. But he could never recall more than a few lines of any one rhyme. \
Both of them knew\'97in a way, it was never out of their minds that what was now happening could not last long. There were times when the fact of impending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on, and they would cling to- \
gether with a sort of despairing sensuality, like a damned soul grasping at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock \
190 1984 \
is within five minutes of striking. But there were also times when they had the illusion not only of safety but of per- manence. So long as they were actually in this room, they both felt, no harm could come to them. Getting there was difficult and dangerous, but the room itself was sanctuary. It was as when Winston had gazed into the heart of the pa- perweight, with the feeling that it would be possible to get inside that glassy world, and that once inside it time could be arrested. Often they gave themselves up to daydreams of escape. Their luck would hold indefinitely, and they would carry on their intrigue, just like this, for the remainder of their natural lives. Or Katharine would die, and by subtle manoeuvrings Winston and Julia would succeed in get- ting married. Or they would commit suicide together. Or they would disappear, alter themselves out of recognition, learn to speak with proletarian accents, get jobs in a factory and live out their lives undetected in a back-street. It was all nonsense, as they both knew. In reality there was no es- cape. Even the one plan that was practicable, suicide, they had no intention of carrying out. To hang on from day to day and from week to week, spinning out a present that had no future, seemed an unconquerable instinct, just as one\'92s lungs will always draw the next breath so long as there is air available. \
Sometimes, too, they talked of engaging in active rebel- lion against the Party, but with no notion of how to take the first step. Even if the fabulous Brotherhood was a real- ity, there still remained the difficulty of finding one\'92s way into it. He told her of the strange intimacy that existed, or \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 191 \
seemed to exist, between himself and O\'92Brien, and of the impulse he sometimes felt, simply to walk into O\'92Brien\'92s presence, announce that he was the enemy of the Party, and demand his help. Curiously enough, this did not strike her as an impossibly rash thing to do. She was used to judg- ing people by their faces, and it seemed natural to her that Winston should believe O\'92Brien to be trustworthy on the strength of a single flash of the eyes. Moreover she took it for granted that everyone, or nearly everyone, secretly hated the Party and would break the rules if he thought it safe to do so. But she refused to believe that widespread, organized opposition existed or could exist. The tales about Goldstein and his underground army, she said, were simply a lot of rubbish which the Party had invented for its own purposes and which you had to pretend to believe in. Times beyond number, at Party rallies and spontaneous demonstrations, she had shouted at the top of her voice for the execution of people whose names she had never heard and in whose sup- posed crimes she had not the faintest belief. When public trials were happening she had taken her place in the detach- ments from the Youth League who surrounded the courts from morning to night, chanting at intervals \'91Death to the traitors!\'92 During the Two Minutes Hate she always excelled all others in shouting insults at Goldstein. Yet she had only the dimmest idea of who Goldstein was and what doctrines he was supposed to represent. She had grown up since the Revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of the fifties and sixties. Such a thing as an indepen- dent political movement was outside her imagination: and \
19 1984 \
in any case the Party was invincible. It would always ex- ist, and it would always be the same. You could only rebel against it by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts of violence such as killing somebody or blowing something up. \
In some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptible to Party propaganda. Once when he happened in some connexion to mention the war against Eurasia, she startled him by saying casually that in her opin- ion the war was not happening. The rocket bombs which fell daily on London were probably fired by the Government of Oceania itself, \'91just to keep people frightened\'92. This was an idea that had literally never occurred to him. She also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that during the Two Minutes Hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out laughing. But she only questioned the teachings of the Party when they in some way touched upon her own life. Often she was ready to accept the official mythology, simply because the difference between truth and falsehood did not seem important to her. She believed, for instance, having learnt it at school, that the Party had invented aeroplanes. (In his own schooldays, Winston remembered, in the late fifties, it was only the helicopter that the Party claimed to have invented; a dozen years later, when Julia was at school, it was already claiming the aeroplane; one generation more, and it would be claiming the steam engine.) And when he told her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born and long before the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally uninteresting. After all, what did it matter who had \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
invented aeroplanes? It was rather more of a shock to him when he discovered from some chance remark that she did not remember that Oceania, four years ago, had been at war with Eastasia and at peace with Eurasia. It was true that she regarded the whole war as a sham: but apparently she had not even noticed that the name of the enemy had changed. \'91I thought we\'92d always been at war with Eurasia,\'92 she said vaguely. It frightened him a little. The invention of aero- planes dated from long before her birth, but the switchover in the war had happened only four years ago, well after she was grown up. He argued with her about it for perhaps a quarter of an hour. In the end he succeeded in forcing her memory back until she did dimly recall that at one time Eastasia and not Eurasia had been the enemy. But the issue still struck her as unimportant. \'91Who cares?\'92 she said im- patiently. \'91It\'92s always one bloody war after another, and one knows the news is all lies anyway.\'92 \
Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the impudent forgeries that he committed there. Such things did not appear to horrify her. She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought of lies becom- ing truths. He told her the story of Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford and the momentous slip of paper which he had once held between his fingers. It did not make much im- pression on her. At first, indeed, she failed to grasp the point of the story. \
\'91Were they friends of yours?\'92 she said. \
\'91No, I never knew them. They were Inner Party members. Besides, they were far older men than I was. They belonged \
194 1984 \
to the old days, before the Revolution. I barely knew them by sight.\'92 \
\'91Then what was there to worry about? People are being killed off all the time, aren\'92t they?\'92 \
He tried to make her understand. \'91This was an excep- tional case. It wasn\'92t just a question of somebody being killed. Do you realize that the past, starting from yester- day, has been actually abolished? If it survives anywhere, it\'92s in a few solid objects with no words attached to them, like that lump of glass there. Already we know almost lit- erally nothing about the Revolution and the years before the Revolution. Every record has been destroyed or falsi- fied, every book has been rewritten, every picture has been repainted, every statue and street and building has been renamed, every date has been altered. And that process is continuing day by day and minute by minute. History has stopped. Nothing exists except an endless present in which the Party is always right. I know, of course, that the past is falsified, but it would never be possible for me to prove it, even when I did the falsification myself. After the thing is done, no evidence ever remains. The only evidence is inside my own mind, and I don\'92t know with any certainty that any other human being shares my memories. Just in that one instance, in my whole life, I did possess actual concrete evi- dence after the event\'97years after it.\'92 \
\'91And what good was that?\'92 \
\'91It was no good, because I threw it away a few minutes lat- er. But if the same thing happened today, I should keep it.\'92 \
\'91Well, I wouldn\'92t!\'92 said Julia. \'91I\'92m quite ready to take Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
risks, but only for something worth while, not for bits of old newspaper. What could you have done with it even if you had kept it?\'92 \
\'91Not much, perhaps. But it was evidence. It might have planted a few doubts here and there, supposing that I\'92d dared to show it to anybody. I don\'92t imagine that we can alter anything in our own lifetime. But one can imagine lit- tle knots of resistance springing up here and there\'97small groups of people banding themselves together, and gradu- ally growing, and even leaving a few records behind, so that the next generations can carry on where we leave off.\'92 \
\'91I\'92m not interested in the next generation, dear. I\'92m inter- ested in US.\'92 \
\'91You\'92re only a rebel from the waist downwards,\'92 he told her. \
She thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight. \
In the ramifications of party doctrine she had not the faintest interest. Whenever he began to talk of the princi- ples of Ingsoc, doublethink, the mutability of the past, and the denial of objective reality, and to use Newspeak words, she became bored and confused and said that she never paid any attention to that kind of thing. One knew that it was all rubbish, so why let oneself be worried by it? She knew when to cheer and when to boo, and that was all one needed. If he persisted in talking of such subjects, she had a disconcerting habit of falling asleep. She was one of those people who can go to sleep at any hour and in any position. Talking to her, he realized how easy it was to present an appearance of or- \
19 1984 \
thodoxy while having no grasp whatever of what orthodoxy meant. In a way, the world-view of the Party imposed itself most successfully on people incapable of understanding it. They could be made to accept the most flagrant violations of reality, because they never fully grasped the enormity of what was demanded of them, and were not sufficiently interested in public events to notice what was happening. By lack of understanding they remained sane. They simply swallowed everything, and what they swallowed did them no harm, because it left no residue behind, just as a grain of corn will pass undigested through the body of a bird. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
Chapter 6 \
\dn32 I\up0 t had happened at last. The expected message had come. All his life, it seemed to him, he had been waiting for this to happen. \
He was walking down the long corridor at the Minis- try and he was almost at the spot where Julia had slipped the note into his hand when he became aware that some- one larger than himself was walking just behind him. The person, whoever it was, gave a small cough, evidently as a prelude to speaking. Winston stopped abruptly and turned. It was O\'92Brien. \
At last they were face to face, and it seemed that his only impulse was to run away. His heart bounded violently. He would have been incapable of speaking. O\'92Brien, however, had continued forward in the same movement, laying a friendly hand for a moment on Winston\'92s arm, so that the two of them were walking side by side. He began speak- ing with the peculiar grave courtesy that differentiated him from the majority of Inner Party members. \
\'91I had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you,\'92 he said. \'91I was reading one of your Newspeak articles in \'91The Times\'92 the other day. You take a scholarly interest in \
Newspeak, I believe?\'92\uc0\u8232 Winston had recovered part of his self-possession. \
\'91Hardly scholarly,\'92 he said. \'91I\'92m only an amateur. It\'92s not my 198 1984 \
subject. I have never had anything to do with the actual construction of the language.\'92 \
\'91But you write it very elegantly,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91That is not only my own opinion. I was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly an expert. His name has slipped my memory for the moment.\'92 \
Again Winston\'92s heart stirred painfully. It was incon- ceivable that this was anything other than a reference to Syme. But Syme was not only dead, he was abolished, an unperson. Any identifiable reference to him would have been mortally dangerous. O\'92Brien\'92s remark must obviously have been intended as a signal, a codeword. By sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he had turned the two of them into accomplices. They had continued to stroll slowly down the corridor, but now O\'92Brien halted. With the curious, dis- arming friendliness that he always managed to put in to the gesture he resettled his spectacles on his nose. Then he went on: \
\'91What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed you had used two words which have become obso- lete. But they have only become so very recently. Have you seen the tenth edition of the Newspeak Dictionary?\'92 \
\'91No,\'92 said Winston. \'91I didn\'92t think it had been issued yet. We are still using the ninth in the Records Department.\'92 \
\'91The tenth edition is not due to appear for some months, I believe. But a few advance copies have been circulated. I have one myself. It might interest you to look at it, per- haps?\'92 \
\'91Very much so,\'92 said Winston, immediately seeing where Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 199 \
this tended.\uc0\u8232 \'91Some of the new developments are most ingenious. The \
reduction in the number of verbs\'97that is the point that will appeal to you, I think. Let me see, shall I send a messenger to you with the dictionary? But I am afraid I invariably for- get anything of that kind. Perhaps you could pick it up at my flat at some time that suited you? Wait. Let me give you my address.\'92 \
They were standing in front of a telescreen. Somewhat absentmindedly O\'92Brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather-covered notebook and a gold ink-pencil. Immediately beneath the telescreen, in such a position that anyone who was watching at the other end of the instrument could read what he was writing, he scribbled an address, tore out the page and handed it to Winston. \
\'91I am usually at home in the evenings,\'92 he said. \'91If not, my servant will give you the dictionary.\'92 \
He was gone, leaving Winston holding the scrap of paper, which this time there was no need to conceal. Nevertheless he carefully memorized what was written on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along with a mass of other papers. \
They had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the most. There was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have. It had been contrived as a way of letting Winston know O\'92Brien\'92s address. This was neces- sary, because except by direct enquiry it was never possible to discover where anyone lived. There were no directories of any kind. \'91If you ever want to see me, this is where I can \
00 1984 \
be found,\'92 was what O\'92Brien had been saying to him. Per- haps there would even be a message concealed somewhere in the dictionary. But at any rate, one thing was certain. The conspiracy that he had dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outer edges of it. \
He knew that sooner or later he would obey O\'92Brien\'92s summons. Perhaps tomorrow, perhaps after a long de- lay\'97he was not certain. What was happening was only the working-out of a process that had started years ago. The first step had been a secret, involuntary thought, the sec- ond had been the opening of the diary. He had moved from thoughts to words, and now from words to actions. The last step was something that would happen in the Ministry of Love. He had accepted it. The end was contained in the be- ginning. But it was frightening: or, more exactly, it was like a foretaste of death, like being a little less alive. Even while he was speaking to O\'92Brien, when the meaning of the words had sunk in, a chilly shuddering feeling had taken posses- sion of his body. He had the sensation of stepping into the dampness of a grave, and it was not much better because he had always known that the grave was there and waiting for him. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 01 \
Chapter 7 \
\dn32 W\up0 inston had woken up with his eyes full of tears. Ju- lia rolled sleepily against him, murmuring something that might have been \'91What\'92s the matter?\'92 \
\'91I dreamt\'97\'92 he began, and stopped short. It was too com- plex to be put into words. There was the dream itself, and there was a memory connected with it that had swum into his mind in the few seconds after waking. \
He lay back with his eyes shut, still sodden in the atmo- sphere of the dream. It was a vast, luminous dream in which his whole life seemed to stretch out before him like a land- scape on a summer evening after rain. It had all occurred inside the glass paperweight, but the surface of the glass was the dome of the sky, and inside the dome everything was flooded with clear soft light in which one could see into interminable distances. The dream had also been compre- hended by\'97indeed, in some sense it had consisted in\'97a gesture of the arm made by his mother, and made again thirty years later by the Jewish woman he had seen on the news film, trying to shelter the small boy from the bullets, before the helicopter blew them both to pieces. \
\'91Do you know,\'92 he said, \'91that until this moment I believed I had murdered my mother?\'92 \
0 \
1984 \
\'91Why did you murder her?\'92 said Julia, almost asleep. \'91I didn\'92t murder her. Not physically.\'92 \
In the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother, and within a few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had all come back. It was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out of his consciousness over many years. He was not certain of the date, but he could not have been less than ten years old, pos- sibly twelve, when it had happened. \
His father had disappeared some time earlier, how much earlier he could not remember. He remembered better the rackety, uneasy circumstances of the time: the periodical panics about air-raids and the sheltering in Tube stations, the piles of rubble everywhere, the unintelligible proc- lamations posted at street corners, the gangs of youths in shirts all the same colour, the enormous queues outside the bakeries, the intermittent machine-gun fire in the dis- tance\'97above all, the fact that there was never enough to eat. He remembered long afternoons spent with other boys in scrounging round dustbins and rubbish heaps, picking out the ribs of cabbage leaves, potato peelings, sometimes even scraps of stale breadcrust from which they carefully scraped away the cinders; and also in waiting for the pass- ing of trucks which travelled over a certain route and were known to carry cattle feed, and which, when they jolted over the bad patches in the road, sometimes spilt a few frag- ments of oil-cake. \
When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any surprise or any violent grief, but a sudden change came over her. She seemed to have become completely spiritless. It was evident even to Winston that she was waiting for \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 0 \
something that she knew must happen. She did everything that was needed\'97cooked, washed, mended, made the bed, swept the floor, dusted the mantelpiece\'97always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluous motion, like an art- ist\'92s lay-figure moving of its own accord. Her large shapely body seemed to relapse naturally into stillness. For hours at a time she would sit almost immobile on the bed, nurs- ing his young sister, a tiny, ailing, very silent child of two or three, with a face made simian by thinness. Very occa- sionally she would take Winston in her arms and press him against her for a long time without saying anything. He was aware, in spite of his youthfulness and selfishness, that this was somehow connected with the never-mentioned thing that was about to happen. \
He remembered the room where they lived, a dark, close- smelling room that seemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane. There was a gas ring in the fender, and a shelf where food was kept, and on the landing outside there was a brown earthenware sink, common to several rooms. He remembered his mother\'92s statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at something in a saucepan. Above all he remembered his continuous hunger, and the fierce sordid battles at mealtimes. He would ask his mother naggingly, over and over again, why there was not more food, he would shout and storm at her (he even remembered the tones of his voice, which was beginning to break prematurely and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way), or he would attempt a snivelling note of pathos in his efforts to get more than his share. His mother was quite ready to give him more than \
04 1984 \
his share. She took it for granted that he, \'91the boy\'92, should have the biggest portion; but however much she gave him he invariably demanded more. At every meal she would be- seech him not to be selfish and to remember that his little sister was sick and also needed food, but it was no use. He would cry out with rage when she stopped ladling, he would try to wrench the saucepan and spoon out of her hands, he would grab bits from his sister\'92s plate. He knew that he was starving the other two, but he could not help it; he even felt that he had a right to do it. The clamorous hunger in his bel- ly seemed to justify him. Between meals, if his mother did not stand guard, he was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf. \
One day a chocolate-ration was issued. There had been no such issue for weeks or months past. He remembered quite clearly that precious little morsel of chocolate. It was a two-ounce slab (they still talked about ounces in those days) between the three of them. It was obvious that it ought to be divided into three equal parts. Suddenly, as though he were listening to somebody else, Winston heard himself demanding in a loud booming voice that he should be giv- en the whole piece. His mother told him not to be greedy. \
There was a long, nagging argument that went round and round, with shouts, whines, tears, remonstrances, bargain- ings. His tiny sister, clinging to her mother with both hands, exactly like a baby monkey, sat looking over her shoulder at him with large, mournful eyes. In the end his mother broke off three-quarters of the chocolate and gave it to Winston, giving the other quarter to his sister. The little girl took hold \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 0 \
of it and looked at it dully, perhaps not knowing what it was. Winston stood watching her for a moment. Then with a sudden swift spring he had snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister\'92s hand and was fleeing for the door. \
\'91Winston, Winston!\'92 his mother called after him. \'91Come back! Give your sister back her chocolate!\'92 \
He stopped, but did not come back. His mother\'92s anx- ious eyes were fixed on his face. Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not know what it was that was on the point of happening. His sister, conscious of having been robbed of something, had set up a feeble wail. His mother drew her arm round the child and pressed its face against her breast. Something in the gesture told him that his sis- ter was dying. He turned and fled down the stairs, with the chocolate growing sticky in his hand. \
He never saw his mother again. After he had devoured the chocolate he felt somewhat ashamed of himself and hung about in the streets for several hours, until hunger drove him home. When he came back his mother had dis- appeared. This was already becoming normal at that time. Nothing was gone from the room except his mother and his sister. They had not taken any clothes, not even his mother\'92s overcoat. To this day he did not know with any certainty that his mother was dead. It was perfectly possible that she had merely been sent to a forced-labour camp. As for his sister, she might have been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colonies for homeless children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which had grown up as a result of the civil war, or she might have been sent to the labour \
0 1984 \
camp along with his mother, or simply left somewhere or other to die. \
The dream was still vivid in his mind, especially the en- veloping protecting gesture of the arm in which its whole meaning seemed to be contained. His mind went back to another dream of two months ago. Exactly as his mother had sat on the dingy whitequilted bed, with the child cling- ing to her, so she had sat in the sunken ship, far underneath him, and drowning deeper every minute, but still looking up at him through the darkening water. \
He told Julia the story of his mother\'92s disappearance. Without opening her eyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position. \
\'91I expect you were a beastly little swine in those days,\'92 she said indistinctly. \'91All children are swine.\'92 \
\'91Yes. But the real point of the story\'97\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 From her breathing it was evident that she was going \
off to sleep again. He would have liked to continue talking about his mother. He did not suppose, from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusual woman, still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind of nobility, a kind of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyed were private ones. Her feelings were her own, and could not be altered from outside. It would not have occurred to her that an action which is ineffectual thereby becomes meaningless. If you loved someone, you loved him, and when you had nothing else to give, you still gave him love. When the last of the chocolate was gone, his mother had clasped the child in her arms. It was no use, it changed \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 0 \
nothing, it did not produce more chocolate, it did not avert the child\'92s death or her own; but it seemed natural to her to do it. The refugee woman in the boat had also covered the little boy with her arm, which was no more use against the bullets than a sheet of paper. The terrible thing that the Par- ty had done was to persuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, while at the same time robbing you of all power over the material world. When once you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feel, what you did or refrained from doing, made literally no dif- ference. Whatever happened you vanished, and neither you nor your actions were ever heard of again. You were lifted clean out of the stream of history. And yet to the people of only two generations ago this would not have seemed all-important, because they were not attempting to alter history. They were governed by private loyalties which they did not question. What mattered were individual relation- ships, and a completely helpless gesture, an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value in itself. The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had remained in this condition. They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, they were loyal to one another. For the first time in his life he did not despise the proles or think of them merely as an inert force which would one day spring to life and re- generate the world. The proles had stayed human. They had not become hardened inside. They had held on to the primi- tive emotions which he himself had to re-learn by conscious effort. And in thinking this he remembered, without appar- ent relevance, how a few weeks ago he had seen a severed \
08 1984 \
hand lying on the pavement and had kicked it into the gut- ter as though it had been a cabbage-stalk. \
\'91The proles are human beings,\'92 he said aloud. \'91We are not human.\'92 \
\'91Why not?\'92 said Julia, who had woken up again.\uc0\u8232 He thought for a little while. \'91Has it ever occurred to you,\'92 he said, \'91that the best thing for us to do would be simply to \
walk out of here before it\'92s too late, and never see each other again?\'92 \
\'91Yes, dear, it has occurred to me, several times. But I\'92m not going to do it, all the same.\'92 \
\'91We\'92ve been lucky,\'92 he said \'91but it can\'92t last much longer. You\'92re young. You look normal and innocent. If you keep clear of people like me, you might stay alive for another fifty \
years.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91No. I\'92ve thought it all out. What you do, I\'92m going to do. \
And don\'92t be too downhearted. I\'92m rather good at staying alive.\'92 \
\'91We may be together for another six months\'97a year\'97 there\'92s no knowing. At the end we\'92re certain to be apart. Do you realize how utterly alone we shall be? When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literally nothing, that either of us can do for the other. If I confess, they\'92ll shoot you, and if I refuse to confess, they\'92ll shoot you just the same. Nothing that I can do or say, or stop myself from saying, will put off your death for as much as five minutes. Neither of us will even know whether the other is alive or dead. We shall be utterly without power of any kind. The one thing that matters is that we shouldn\'92t betray one another, although \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 09 \
even that can\'92t make the slightest difference.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91If you mean confessing,\'92 she said, \'91we shall do that, right \
enough. Everybody always confesses. You can\'92t help it. They torture you.\'92 \
\'91I don\'92t mean confessing. Confession is not betrayal. What you say or do doesn\'92t matter: only feelings matter. If they could make me stop loving you\'97that would be the real betrayal.\'92 \
She thought it over. \'91They can\'92t do that,\'92 she said final- ly. \'91It\'92s the one thing they can\'92t do. They can make you say anything\'97ANYTHING\'97but they can\'92t make you believe it. They can\'92t get inside you.\'92 \
\'91No,\'92 he said a little more hopefully, \'91no; that\'92s quite true. They can\'92t get inside you. If you can FEEL that staying hu- \
man is worth while, even when it can\'92t have any result whatever, you\'92ve beaten them.\'92 \
He thought of the telescreen with its never-sleeping ear. They could spy upon you night and day, but if you kept your head you could still outwit them. With all their cleverness \
they had never mastered the secret of finding out what an- other human being was thinking. Perhaps that was less true when you were actually in their hands. One did not know what happened inside the Ministry of Love, but it was pos- sible to guess: tortures, drugs, delicate instruments that registered your nervous reactions, gradual wearing-down by sleeplessness and solitude and persistent questioning. Facts, at any rate, could not be kept hidden. They could be tracked down by enquiry, they could be squeezed out of you by torture. But if the object was not to stay alive but to stay \
10 1984 \
human, what difference did it ultimately make? They could not alter your feelings: for that matter you could not alter them yourself, even if you wanted to. They could lay bare in the utmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought; but the inner heart, whose workings were mysteri- ous even to yourself, remained impregnable. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
Chapter 8 \
\dn32 T\up0 hey had done it, they had done it at last!\uc0\u8232 The room they were standing in was long-shaped and softly lit. The telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur; the \
richness of the dark-blue carpet gave one the impression of treading on velvet. At the far end of the room O\'92Brien was sitting at a table under a green-shaded lamp, with a mass of papers on either side of him. He had not bothered to look up when the servant showed Julia and Winston in. \
Winston\'92s heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would be able to speak. They had done it, they had done it at last, was all he could think. It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer folly to arrive together; though it was true that they had come by different routes and only met on O\'92Brien\'92s doorstep. But merely to walk into such a place needed an effort of the nerve. It was only on very rare occasions that one saw inside the dwelling-plac- es of the Inner Party, or even penetrated into the quarter of the town where they lived. The whole atmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness and spaciousness of every- thing, the unfamiliar smells of good food and good tobacco, the silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white-jacketed servants hurrying to and fro\'97everything was intimidating. Although he had a good pretext for com- ing here, he was haunted at every step by the fear that a \
1 1984 \
black-uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round the corner, demand his papers, and order him to get out. O\'92Brien\'92s servant, however, had admitted the two of them without demur. He was a small, dark-haired man in a white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionless face which might have been that of a Chinese. The passage down which he led them was softly carpeted, with cream- papered walls and white wainscoting, all exquisitely clean. \
That too was intimidating. Winston could not remember ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were not grimy from the contact of human bodies. \
O\'92Brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studying it intently. His heavy face, bent down so that one could see the line of the nose, looked both for- midable and intelligent. For perhaps twenty seconds he sat without stirring. Then he pulled the speakwrite towards him and rapped out a message in the hybrid jargon of the Ministries: \
\'92Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise\uc0\u8232 stop suggestion contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stop unproceed constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery overheads stop end message.\'92 \
He rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across the soundless carpet. A little of the official at- mosphere seemed to have fallen away from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer than \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
usual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed. The terror that Winston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinary embarrassment. It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a stupid mistake. For what evidence had he in reality that O\'92Brien was any kind of political conspirator? Nothing but a flash of the eyes and a single equivocal remark: beyond that, only his own secret imaginings, founded on a dream. He could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come to borrow the dictionary, because in that case Julia\'92s presence was impos- sible to explain. As O\'92Brien passed the telescreen a thought seemed to strike him. He stopped, turned aside and pressed a switch on the wall. There was a sharp snap. The voice had stopped. \
Julia uttered a tiny sound, a sort of squeak of surprise. Even in the midst of his panic, Winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold his tongue. \
\'91You can turn it off!\'92 he said. \
\'91Yes,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91we can turn it off. We have that privi- lege.\'92 \
He was opposite them now. His solid form towered over the pair of them, and the expression on his face was still indecipherable. He was waiting, somewhat sternly, for Winston to speak, but about what? Even now it was quite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering ir- ritably why he had been interrupted. Nobody spoke. After the stopping of the telescreen the room seemed deadly si- lent. The seconds marched past, enormous. With difficulty Winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on O\'92Brien\'92s. Then \
14 1984 \
suddenly the grim face broke down into what might have been the beginnings of a smile. With his characteristic ges- ture O\'92Brien resettled his spectacles on his nose. \
\'91Shall I say it, or will you?\'92 he said. \
\'91I will say it,\'92 said Winston promptly. \'91That thing is really turned off?\'92 \
\'91Yes, everything is turned off. We are alone.\'92 \'91We have come here because\'97\'97\'92 \
He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness of his own motives. Since he did not in fact know what kind of help he expected from O\'92Brien, it was not easy to say why he had come here. He went on, conscious that what he was saying must sound both feeble and pretentious: \
\'91We believe that there is some kind of conspiracy, some kind of secret organization working against the Party, and that you are involved in it. We want to join it and work for it. We are enemies of the Party. We disbelieve in the principles of Ingsoc. We are thought-criminals. We are also adulter- ers. I tell you this because we want to put ourselves at your mercy. If you want us to incriminate ourselves in any other way, we are ready.\'92 \
He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the door had opened. Sure enough, the little yel- low-faced servant had come in without knocking. Winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decanter and glasses. \
\'91Martin is one of us,\'92 said O\'92Brien impassively. \'91Bring the drinks over here, Martin. Put them on the round table. Have we enough chairs? Then we may as well sit down and talk in comfort. Bring a chair for yourself, Martin. This is \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
business. You can stop being a servant for the next ten min- utes.\'92 \
The little man sat down, quite at his ease, and yet still with a servant-like air, the air of a valet enjoying a priv- ilege. Winston regarded him out of the corner of his eye. It struck him that the man\'92s whole life was playing a part, and that he felt it to be dangerous to drop his assumed per- sonality even for a moment. O\'92Brien took the decanter by the neck and filled up the glasses with a dark-red liquid. It aroused in Winston dim memories of something seen long ago on a wall or a hoarding\'97a vast bottle composed of elec- tric lights which seemed to move up and down and pour its contents into a glass. Seen from the top the stuff looked al- most black, but in the decanter it gleamed like a ruby. It had a sour-sweet smell. He saw Julia pick up her glass and sniff at it with frank curiosity. \
\'91It is called wine,\'92 said O\'92Brien with a faint smile. \'91You will have read about it in books, no doubt. Not much of it gets to the Outer Party, I am afraid.\'92 His face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass: \'91I think it is fitting that we should begin by drinking a health. To our Leader: To Em- manuel Goldstein.\'92 \
Winston took up his glass with a certain eagerness. Wine was a thing he had read and dreamed about. Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charrington\'92s half-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the olden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts. For some reason he had always thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, like that of blackberry jam and an immediate intoxi- \
1 1984 \
cating effect. Actually, when he came to swallow it, the stuff was distinctly disappointing. The truth was that after years of gin-drinking he could barely taste it. He set down the empty glass. \
\'91Then there is such a person as Goldstein?\'92 he said. \
\'91Yes, there is such a person, and he is alive. Where, I do not know.\'92 \
\'91And the conspiracy\'97the organization? Is it real? It is not simply an invention of the Thought Police?\'92 \
\'91No, it is real. The Brotherhood, we call it. You will never learn much more about the Brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it. I will come back to that pres- ently.\'92 He looked at his wrist-watch. \'91It is unwise even for members of the Inner Party to turn off the telescreen for more than half an hour. You ought not to have come here together, and you will have to leave separately. You, com- rade\'92\'97he bowed his head to Julia\'97\'92will leave first. We have about twenty minutes at our disposal. You will understand that I must start by asking you certain questions. In general terms, what are you prepared to do?\'92 \
\'91Anything that we are capable of,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was facing Winston. He almost ignored Julia, seeming to take it for granted that Winston could speak for her. For a moment the lids flitted down over his eyes. He began asking his questions in a low, expressionless voice, as though this were a routine, a sort of catechism, most of whose answers \
were known to him already.\uc0\u8232 \'91You are prepared to give your lives?\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
\'91Yes.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91You are prepared to commit murder?\'92\u8232 \'91Yes.\'92\u8232 \'91To commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death \
of hundreds of innocent people?\'92 \'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91To betray your country to foreign powers?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes.\'92\u8232 \'91You are prepared to cheat, to forge, to blackmail, to cor- \
rupt the minds of children, to distribute habit-forming drugs, to encourage prostitution, to disseminate venereal diseases\'97to do anything which is likely to cause demoral- ization and weaken the power of the Party?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91If, for example, it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuric acid in a child\'92s face\'97are you prepared to do that?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91You are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your life as a waiter or a dock-worker?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91You are prepared to commit suicide, if and when we or- der you to do so?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one another again?\'92 \
\'91No!\'92 broke in Julia.\uc0\u8232 It appeared to Winston that a long time passed before \
he answered. For a moment he seemed even to have been 18 1984 \
deprived of the power of speech. His tongue worked sound- lessly, forming the opening syllables first of one word, then of the other, over and over again. Until he had said it, he did not know which word he was going to say. \'91No,\'92 he said finally. \
\'91You did well to tell me,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91It is necessary for us to know everything.\'92 \
He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat more expression in it: \
\'91Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a different person? We may be obliged to give him a new identity. His face, his movements, the shape of his hands, the colour of his hair\'97even his voice would be different. \
And you yourself might have become a different person. Our surgeons can alter people beyond recognition. Some- times it is necessary. Sometimes we even amputate a limb.\'92 \
Winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin\'92s Mongolian face. There were no scars that he could see. Julia had turned a shade paler, so that her freckles were showing, but she faced O\'92Brien boldly. She murmured something that seemed to be assent. \
\'91Good. Then that is settled.\'92 \
There was a silver box of cigarettes on the table. With a rather absent-minded air O\'92Brien pushed them towards the others, took one himself, then stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro, as though he could think better standing. \
They were very good cigarettes, very thick and well-packed, with an unfamiliar silkiness in the paper. O\'92Brien looked at his wrist-watch again. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
\'91You had better go back to your Pantry, Martin,\'92 he said. \'91I shall switch on in a quarter of an hour. Take a good look at these comrades\'92 faces before you go. You will be seeing \
them again. I may not.\'92\uc0\u8232 Exactly as they had done at the front door, the little man\'92s \
dark eyes flickered over their faces. There was not a trace of friendliness in his manner. He was memorizing their appearance, but he felt no interest in them, or appeared to feel none. It occurred to Winston that a synthetic face was perhaps incapable of changing its expression. Without speaking or giving any kind of salutation, Martin went out, closing the door silently behind him. O\'92Brien was strolling up and down, one hand in the pocket of his black overalls, the other holding his cigarette. \
\'91You understand,\'92 he said, \'91that you will be fighting in the dark. You will always be in the dark. You will receive orders and you will obey them, without knowing why. Later I shall send you a book from which you will learn the true nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by which we shall destroy it. When you have read the book, you will be full members of the Brotherhood. But between the gen- eral aims that we are fighting for and the immedi ate tasks of the moment, you will never know anything. I tell you that the Brotherhood exists, but I cannot tell you wheth- er it numbers a hundred members, or ten million. From your personal knowledge you will never be able to say that it numbers even as many as a dozen. You will have three or four contacts, who will be renewed from time to time as they disappear. As this was your first contact, it will be \
0 1984 \
preserved. When you receive orders, they will come from me. If we find it necessary to communicate with you, it will be through Martin. When you are finally caught, you will confess. That is unavoidable. But you will have very little to confess, other than your own actions. You will not be able to betray more than a handful of unimportant people. Probably you will not even betray me. By that time I may be dead, or I shall have become a different person, with a dif- ferent face.\'92 \
He continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet. In spite of the bulkiness of his body there was a remarkable grace in his movements. It came out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket, or manipu- lated a cigarette. More even than of strength, he gave an impression of confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony. However much in earnest he might be, he had nothing of the single-mindedness that belongs to a fanatic. When he spoke of murder, suicide, venereal disease, am- putated limbs, and altered faces, it was with a faint air of persiflage. \'91This is unavoidable,\'92 his voice seemed to say; \
\'91this is what we have got to do, unflinchingly. But this is not what we shall be doing when life is worth living again.\'92 A wave of admiration, almost of worship, flowed out from Winston towards O\'92Brien. For the moment he had forgot- ten the shadowy figure of Goldstein. When you looked at \
O\'92Brien\'92s powerful shoulders and his blunt-featured face, so ugly and yet so civilized, it was impossible to believe that he could be defeated. There was no stratagem that he was not equal to, no danger that he could not foresee. Even Julia \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
seemed to be impressed. She had let her cigarette go out and was listening intently. O\'92Brien went on: \
\'91You will have heard rumours of the existence of the Brotherhood. No doubt you have formed your own picture of it. You have imagined, probably, a huge underworld of conspirators, meeting secretly in cellars, scribbling mes- sages on walls, recognizing one another by codewords or by special movements of the hand. Nothing of the kind exists. The members of the Brotherhood have no way of recogniz- ing one another, and it is impossible for any one member to be aware of the identity of more than a few others. Gold- stein himself, if he fell into the hands of the Thought Police, could not give them a complete list of members, or any in- formation that would lead them to a complete list. No such list exists. The Brotherhood cannot be wiped out because it is not an organization in the ordinary sense. Nothing holds it together except an idea which is indestructible. You will never have anything to sustain you, except the idea. You will get no comradeship and no encouragement. When fi- nally you are caught, you will get no help. We never help our members. At most, when it is absolutely necessary that someone should be silenced, we are occasionally able to smuggle a razor blade into a prisoner\'92s cell. You will have to get used to living without results and without hope. You will work for a while, you will be caught, you will confess, and then you will die. Those are the only results that you will ever see. There is no possibility that any perceptible change will happen within our own lifetime. We are the dead. Our only true life is in the future. We shall take part \
 1984 \
in it as handfuls of dust and splinters of bone. But how far away that future may be, there is no knowing. It might be a thousand years. At present nothing is possible except to extend the area of sanity little by little. We cannot act col- lectively. We can only spread our knowledge outwards from individual to individual, generation after generation. In the face of the Thought Police there is no other way.\'92 \
He halted and looked for the third time at his wrist- watch. \
\'91It is almost time for you to leave, comrade,\'92 he said to Ju- lia. \'91Wait. The decanter is still half full.\'92 \
He filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem. \
\'91What shall it be this time?\'92 he said, still with the same faint suggestion of irony. \'91To the confusion of the Thought Police? To the death of Big Brother? To humanity? To the future?\'92 \
\'91To the past,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 \'91The past is more important,\'92 agreed O\'92Brien gravely. They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia \
stood up to go. O\'92Brien took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flat white tablet which he told her to place on her tongue. It was important, he said, not to go out smelling of wine: the lift attendants were very obser- vant. As soon as the door had shut behind her he appeared to forget her existence. He took another pace or two up and down, then stopped. \
\'91There are details to be settled,\'92 he said. \'91I assume that you have a hiding-place of some kind?\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
Winston explained about the room over Mr Char- rington\'92s shop. \
\'91That will do for the moment. Later we will arrange something else for you. It is important to change one\'92s hid- ing-place frequently. Meanwhile I shall send you a copy of THE BOOK\'92\'97even O\'92Brien, Winston noticed, seemed to pronounce the words as though they were in italics\'97\'92Gold- stein\'92s book, you understand, as soon as possible. It may be some days before I can get hold of one. There are not many in existence, as you can imagine. The Thought Police hunt them down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produce them. It makes very little difference. The book is indestructible. If the last copy were gone, we could repro- duce it almost word for word. Do you carry a brief-case to work with you?\'92 he added. \
\'91As a rule, yes.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91What is it like?\'92\u8232 \'91Black, very shabby. With two straps.\'92\u8232 \'91Black, two straps, very shabby\'97good. One day in the \
fairly near future\'97I cannot give a date\'97one of the messag- es among your morning\'92s work will contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for a repeat. On the following day you will go to work without your brief-case. At some time during the day, in the street, a man will touch you on the arm and say \'91I think you have dropped your brief-case.\'92 The one he gives you will contain a copy of Goldstein\'92s book. \
You will return it within fourteen days.\'92\uc0\u8232 They were silent for a moment.\u8232 \'91There are a couple of minutes before you need go,\'92 said \
4 1984 \
O\'92Brien. \'91We shall meet again\'97if we do meet again\'97\'97\'92 Winston looked up at him. \'91In the place where there is no \
darkness?\'92 he said hesitantly.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien nodded without appearance of surprise. \'91In the \
place where there is no darkness,\'92 he said, as though he had recognized the allusion. \'91And in the meantime, is there any- thing that you wish to say before you leave? Any message? \
Any question?.\'92\uc0\u8232 Winston thought. There did not seem to be any further \
question that he wanted to ask: still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-sounding generalities. Instead of any- thing directly connected with O\'92Brien or the Brotherhood, there came into his mind a sort of composite picture of the dark bedroom where his mother had spent her last days, and the little room over Mr Charrington\'92s shop, and the glass paperweight, and the steel engraving in its rosewood frame. Almost at random he said: \
\'91Did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins \'91Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s\'92?\'92 \
Again O\'92Brien nodded. With a sort of grave courtesy he completed the stanza: \
\'92Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement\'92s,\uc0\u8232 You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin\'92s, When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey, When I grow rich, say the bells of Shoreditch.\'92 \
\'91You knew the last line!\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes, I knew the last line. And now, I am afraid, it is time \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
for you to go. But wait. You had better let me give you one of these tablets.\'92 \
As Winston stood up O\'92Brien held out a hand. His pow- erful grip crushed the bones of Winston\'92s palm. At the door Winston looked back, but O\'92Brien seemed already to be in process of putting him out of mind. He was waiting with his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen. Beyond him Winston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and the speakwrite and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers. The incident was closed. Within thirty seconds, it occurred to him, O\'92Brien would be back at his interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party. \
 1984 \
Chapter 9 \
\dn32 W\up0 inston was gelatinous with fatigue. Gelatinous was the right word. It had come into his head spontane- ously. His body seemed to have not only the weakness of a \
jelly, but its translucency. He felt that if he held up his hand he would be able to see the light through it. All the blood and lymph had been drained out of him by an enormous debauch of work, leaving only a frail structure of nerves, bones, and skin. All sensations seemed to be magnified. His overalls fretted his shoulders, the pavement tickled his feet, even the opening and closing of a hand was an effort that made his joints creak. \
He had worked more than ninety hours in five days. So had everyone else in the Ministry. Now it was all over, and he had literally nothing to do, no Party work of any descrip- tion, until tomorrow morning. He could spend six hours in the hiding-place and another nine in his own bed. Slowly, in mild afternoon sunshine, he walked up a dingy street in the direction of Mr Charrington\'92s shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, but irrationally convinced that this after- noon there was no danger of anyone interfering with him. \
The heavy brief-case that he was carrying bumped against his knee at each step, sending a tingling sensation up and down the skin of his leg. Inside it was the book, which he had now had in his possession for six days and had not yet \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
opened, nor even looked at.\uc0\u8232 On the sixth day of Hate Week, after the processions, the \
speeches, the shouting, the singing, the banners, the posters, the films, the waxworks, the rolling of drums and squeal- ing of trumpets, the tramp of marching feet, the grinding of the caterpillars of tanks, the roar of massed planes, the booming of guns\'97after six days of this, when the great or- gasm was quivering to its climax and the general hatred of Eurasia had boiled up into such delirium that if the crowd could have got their hands on the 2,000 Eurasian war-crim- inals who were to be publicly hanged on the last day of the proceedings, they would unquestionably have torn them to pieces\'97at just this moment it had been announced that Oceania was not after all at war with Eurasia. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Eurasia was an ally. \
There was, of course, no admission that any change had taken place. Merely it became known, with extreme sud- denness and everywhere at once, that Eastasia and not Eurasia was the enemy. Winston was taking part in a dem- onstration in one of the central London squares at the moment when it happened. It was night, and the white fac- es and the scarlet banners were luridly floodlit. The square was packed with several thousand people, including a block of about a thousand schoolchildren in the uniform of the Spies. On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a small lean man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull over which a few lank locks strag- gled, was haranguing the crowd. A little Rumpelstiltskin figure, contorted with hatred, he gripped the neck of the \
8 1984 \
microphone with one hand while the other, enormous at the end of a bony arm, clawed the air menacingly above his head. His voice, made metallic by the amplifiers, boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities, massacres, depor- tations, lootings, rapings, torture of prisoners, bombing of civilians, lying propaganda, unjust aggressions, broken treaties. It was almost impossible to listen to him without being first convinced and then maddened. At every few mo- ments the fury of the crowd boiled over and the voice of the speaker was drowned by a wild beast-like roaring that rose uncontrollably from thousands of throats. The most sav- age yells of all came from the schoolchildren. The speech had been proceeding for perhaps twenty minutes when a messenger hurried on to the platform and a scrap of paper was slipped into the speaker\'92s hand. He unrolled and read it without pausing in his speech. Nothing altered in his voice or manner, or in the content of what he was saying, but sud- denly the names were different. Without words said, a wave of understanding rippled through the crowd. Oceania was at war with Eastasia! The next moment there was a tremen- dous commotion. The banners and posters with which the square was decorated were all wrong! Quite half of them had the wrong faces on them. It was sabotage! The agents of Goldstein had been at work! There was a riotous interlude while posters were ripped from the walls, banners torn to shreds and trampled underfoot. The Spies performed prod- igies of activity in clambering over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered from the chimneys. But within two or three minutes it was all over. The orator, still gripping \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
the neck of the microphone, his shoulders hunched forward, his free hand clawing at the air, had gone straight on with his speech. One minute more, and the feral roars of rage were again bursting from the crowd. The Hate continued exactly as before, except that the target had been changed. \
The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker had switched from one line to the other ac- tually in midsentence, not only without a pause, but without even breaking the syntax. But at the moment he had other things to preoccupy him. It was during the moment of dis- order while the posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did not see had tapped him on the shoulder and said, \'91Excuse me, I think you\'92ve dropped your brief- case.\'92 He took the brief-case abstractedly, without speaking. He knew that it would be days before he had an opportuni- ty to look inside it. The instant that the demonstration was over he went straight to the Ministry of Truth, though the time was now nearly twenty-three hours. The entire staff of the Ministry had done likewise. The orders already issu- ing from the telescreen, recalling them to their posts, were hardly necessary. \
Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia. A large part of the political lit- erature of five years was now completely obsolete. Reports and records of all kinds, newspapers, books, pamphlets, films, sound-tracks, photographs\'97all had to be rectified at lightning speed. Although no directive was ever issued, it was known that the chiefs of the Department intended that within one week no reference to the war with Eurasia, \
0 1984 \
or the alliance with Eastasia, should remain in existence anywhere. The work was overwhelming, all the more so because the processes that it involved could not be called by their true names. Everyone in the Records Department worked eighteen hours in the twenty-four, with two three- hour snatches of sleep. Mattresses were brought up from the cellars and pitched all over the corridors: meals con- sisted of sandwiches and Victory Coffee wheeled round on trolleys by attendants from the canteen. Each time that Winston broke off for one of his spells of sleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work, and each time that he crawled back sticky-eyed and aching, it was to find that another shower of paper cylinders had covered the desk like a snow- drift, halfburying the speakwrite and overflowing on to the floor, so that the first job was always to stack them into a neat enough pile to give him room to work. What was worst of all was that the work was by no means purely mechanical. Often it was enough merely to substitute one name for an- other, but any detailed report of events demanded care and imagination. Even the geographical knowledge that one needed in transferring the war from one part of the world to another was considerable. \
By the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wiping every few minutes. It was like struggling with some crushing physical task, something which one had the right to refuse and which one was never- theless neurotically anxious to accomplish. In so far as he had time to remember it, he was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into the speakwrite, every stroke \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
of his ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie. He was as anxious as anyone else in the Department that the forgery should be perfect. On the morning of the sixth day the dribble of cyl- inders slowed down. For as much as half an hour nothing came out of the tube; then one more cylinder, then nothing. Everywhere at about the same time the work was easing off. A deep and as it were secret sigh went through the Depart- ment. A mighty deed, which could never be mentioned, had been achieved. It was now impossible for any human being to prove by documentary evidence that the war with Eurasia had ever happened. At twelve hundred it was unexpectedly announced that all workers in the Ministry were free till tomorrow morning. Winston, still carrying the brief-case containing the book, which had remained between his feet while he worked and under his body while he slept, went home, shaved himself, and almost fell asleep in his bath, al- though the water was barely more than tepid. \
With a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair above Mr Charrington\'92s shop. He was tired, but not sleepy any longer. He opened the window, lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water for coffee. Julia would arrive presently: meanwhile there was the book. He sat down in the sluttish armchair and undid the straps of the brief-case. \
A heavy black volume, amateurishly bound, with no name or title on the cover. The print also looked slightly irregular. The pages were worn at the edges, and fell apart, easily, as though the book had passed through many hands. \
The inscription on the title-page ran:\uc0\u8232  1984 \
THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF OLIGARCHICAL COLLECTIVISM by\uc0\u8232 Emmanuel Goldstein \
Winston began reading: \
Chapter I \
Ignorance is Strength \
Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age, there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle, and the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne count- less different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the essential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium, however far it is pushed one way or the other. \
The aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable... \
Winston stopped reading, chiefly in order to appreciate the fact that he was reading, in comfort and safety. He was alone: no telescreen, no ear at the keyhole, no nervous im- pulse to glance over his shoulder or cover the page with his hand. The sweet summer air played against his cheek. From somewhere far away there floated the faint shouts of chil- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
dren: in the room itself there was no sound except the insect voice of the clock. He settled deeper into the arm-chair and put his feet up on the fender. It was bliss, it was etemity. Suddenly, as one sometimes does with a book of which one knows that one will ultimately read and re-read every word, he opened it at a different place and found himself at Chap- ter III. He went on reading: \
Chapter III \
War is Peace \
The splitting up of the world into three great super-states was an event which could be and indeed was foreseen before the middle of the twentieth century. With the ab- sorption of Europe by Russia and of the British Empire by the United States, two of the three existing powers, Eurasia and Oceania, were already effectively in being. The third, Eastasia, only emerged as a distinct unit after another de- cade of confused fighting. The frontiers between the three super-states are in some places arbitrary, and in others they fluctuate according to the fortunes of war, but in general they follow geographical lines. Eurasia comprises the whole of the northern part of the European and Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Bering Strait. Oceania comprises the Americas, the Atlantic islands including the British Isles, Australasia, and the southern portion of Africa. Eastasia, smaller than the others and with a less definite western frontier, comprises China and the countries to the south of \
4 1984 \
it, the Japanese islands and a large but fluctuating portion of Manchuria, Mongolia, and Tibet. \
In one combination or another, these three super-states are permanently at war, and have been so for the past twen- ty-five years. War, however, is no longer the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the early decades of the twentieth century. It is a warfare of limited aims between combatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material cause for fighting and are not divided by any genu- ine ideological difference This is not to say that either the conduct of war, or the prevailing attitude towards it, has be- come less bloodthirsty or more chivalrous. On the contrary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countries, and such acts as raping, looting, the slaughter of children, the reduction of whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against prisoners which extend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normal, and, when they are com- mitted by one\'92s own side and not by the enemy, meritorious. But in a physical sense war involves very small numbers of people, mostly highly-trained specialists, and causes com- paratively few casualties. The fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vague frontiers whose whereabouts the average man can only guess at, or round the Floating For- tresses which guard strategic spots on the sea lanes. In the centres of civilization war means no more than a contin- uous shortage of consumption goods, and the occasional crash of a rocket bomb which may cause a few scores of deaths. War has in fact changed its character. More exactly, the reasons for which war is waged have changed in their \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
order of importance. Motives which were already present to some small extent in the great wars of the early twentieth centuury have now become dominant and are consciously recognized and acted upon. \
To understand the nature of the present war\'97for in spite of the regrouping which occurs every few years, it is al- ways the same war\'97one must realize in the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive. None of the three su- per-states could be definitively conquered even by the other two in combination. They are too evenly matched, and their natural defences are too formidable. Eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces, Oceania by the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, Eastasia by the fecundity and indus tri- ousness of its inhabitants. Secondly, there is no longer, in a material sense, anything to fight about. With the estab- lishment of self-contained economies, in which production and consumption are geared to one another, the scramble for markets which was a main cause of previous wars has come to an end, while the competition for raw materials is no longer a matter of life and death. In any case each of the three super-states is so vast that it can obtain almost all the materials that it needs within its own boundaries. In so far as the war has a direct economic purpose, it is a war for la- bour power. Between the frontiers of the super-states, and not permanently in the possession of any of them, there lies a rough quadrilateral with its corners at Tangier, Brazza- ville, Darwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the population of the earth. It is for the posses- sion of these thickly-populated regions, and of the northern \
 1984 \
ice-cap, that the three powers are constantly struggling. In practice no one power ever controls the whole of the disput- ed area. Portions of it are constantly changing hands, and it is the chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sud- den stroke of treachery that dictates the endless changes of alignment. \
All of the disputed territories contain valuable minerals, and some of them yield important vegetable products such as rubber which in colder climates it is necessary to syn- thesize by comparatively expensive methods. But above all they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour. Which- ever power controls equatorial Africa, or the countries of the Middle East, or Southern India, or the Indonesian \
Archipelago, disposes also of the bodies of scores or hun- dreds of millions of ill-paid and hard-working coolies. The inhabitants of these areas, reduced more or less openly to the status of slaves, pass continually from conqueror to con- queror, and are expended like so much coal or oil in the race to turn out more armaments, to capture more territory, to control more labour power, to turn out more armaments, to capture more territory, and so on indefinitely. It should be noted that the fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areas. The frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congo and the northern shore of the Mediterranean; the islands of the In- dian Ocean and the Pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured by Oceania or by Eastasia; in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia and Eastasia is never stable; round the Pole all three powers lay claim to enormous terri- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
tories which in fact are largely unihabited and unexplored: but the balance of power always remains roughly even, and the territory which forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolate. Moreover, the labour of the ex- ploited peoples round the Equator is not really necessary to the world\'92s economy. They add nothing to the wealth of the world, since whatever they produce is used for purposes of war, and the object of waging a war is always to be in a bet- ter position in which to wage another war. By their labour the slave populations allow the tempo of continuous war- fare to be speeded up. But if they did not exist, the structure of world society, and the process by which it maintains it- self, would not be essentially different. \
The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of DOUBLETHINK, this aim is simul- taneously recognized and not recognized by the directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living. Ever since the end of the nineteenth century, the problem of what to do with the surplus of consumption goods has been latent in industrial society. At present, when few human be- ings even have enough to eat, this problem is obviously not urgent, and it might not have become so, even if no artifi- cial processes of destruction had been at work. The world of today is a bare, hungry, dilapidated place compared with the world that existed before 1914, and still more so if com- pared with the imaginary future to which the people of that period looked forward. In the early twentieth century, the vision of a future society unbelievably rich, leisured, orderly, \
8 1984 \
and efficient\'97a glittering antiseptic world of glass and steel and snow-white concrete\'97was part of the consciousness of nearly every literate person. Science and technology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural to assume that they would go on developing. This failed to happen, partly because of the impoverishment caused by a long series of wars and revolutions, partly because scientific and technical progress depended on the empirical habit of thought, which could not survive in a strictly regimented society. As a whole the world is more primitive today than it was fifty years ago. Certain backward areas have advanced, and various devices, always in some way connected with warfare and police espionage, have been developed, but experiment and invention have largely stopped, and the ravages of the atomic war of the nineteen-fifties have nev- er been fully repaired. Nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are still there. From the moment when the machine first made its appearance it was clear to all think- ing people that the need for human drudgery, and therefore to a great extent for human inequality, had disappeared. If the machine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt, illiteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few generations. And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort of automatic process\'97 by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible not to distribute\'97the machine did raise the living standards of the average humand being very greatly over a period of about fifty years at the end of the nineteenth and the begin- ning of the twentieth centuries. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the destruction\'97indeed, in some sense was the destruction\'97of a hierarchical society. In a world in which everyone worked short hours, had enough to eat, lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possessed a motor-car or even an aeroplane, the most obvious and per- haps the most important form of inequality would already have disappeared. If it once became general, wealth would confer no distinction. It was possible, no doubt, to imagine a society in which WEALTH, in the sense of personal pos- sessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while POWER remained in the hands of a small privileged caste. But in practice such a society could not long remain sta- ble. For if leisure and security were enjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normally stupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to think for themselves; and when once they had done this, they would sooner or later realize that the privileged minority had no function, and they would sweep it away. In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a basis of pov- erty and ignorance. To return to the agricultural past, as some thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth cen- tury dreamed of doing, was not a practicable solution. It conflicted with the tendency towards mechanization which had become quasi-instinctive throughout almost the whole world, and moreover, any country which remained indus- trially backward was helpless in a military sense and was bound to be dominated, directly or indirectly, by its more advanced rivals. \
40 1984 \
Nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty by restricting the output of goods. This happened to a great extent during the final phase of capitalism, rough- ly between 1920 and 1940. The economy of many countries was allowed to stagnate, land went out of cultivation, capital equipment was not added to, great blocks of the popula- tion were prevented from working and kept half alive by State charity. But this, too, entailed military weakness, and since the privations it inflicted were obviously unneces- sary, it made opposition inevitable. The problem was how to keep the wheels of industry turning without increasing the real wealth of the world. Goods must be produced, but they must not be distributed. And in practice the only way of achieving this was by continuous warfare. \
The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives, but of the products of human labour. War is a way of shattering to pieces, or pouring into the stratosphere, or sinking in the depths of the sea, materials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortable, and hence, in the long run, too intelligent. Even when weapons of war are not actually destroyed, their manufacture is still a convenient way of expending labour power without pro- ducing anything that can be consumed. A Floating Fortress, for example, has locked up in it the labour that would build several hundred cargo-ships. Ultimately it is scrapped as obsolete, never having brought any material benefit to any- body, and with further enormous labours another Floating Fortress is built. In principle the war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus that might exist after meet- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 41 \
ing the bare needs of the population. In practice the needs of the population are always underestimated, with the re- sult that there is a chronic shortage of half the necessities of life; but this is looked on as an advantage. It is deliberate policy to keep even the favoured groups somewhere near the brink of hardship, because a general state of scarcity increases the importance of small privileges and thus mag- nifies the distinction between one group and another. By the standards of the early twentieth century, even a mem- ber of the Inner Party lives an austere, laborious kind of life. Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjoy his large, well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, the bet- ter quality of his food and drink and tobacco, his two or three servants, his private motor-car or helicopter\'97set him in a different world from a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party have a similar advantage in comparison with the submerged masses whom we call \
\'91the proles\'92. The social atmosphere is that of a besieged city, where the possession of a lump of horseflesh makes the dif- ference between wealth and poverty. And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, and therefore in danger, makes the handing-over of all power to a small caste seem the natural, unavoidable condition of survival. \
War, it will be seen, accomplishes the necessary destruc- tion, but accomplishes it in a psychologically acceptable way. In principle it would be quite simple to waste the surplus labour of the world by building temples and pyramids, by digging holes and filling them up again, or even by produc- ing vast quantities of goods and then setting fire to them. \
4 1984 \
But this would provide only the economic and not the emo- tional basis for a hierarchical society. What is concerned here is not the morale of masses, whose attitude is unim- portant so long as they are kept steadily at work, but the morale of the Party itself. Even the humblest Party member is expected to be competent, industrious, and even intel- ligent within narrow limits, but it is also necessary that he should be a credulous and ignorant fanatic whose prevailing moods are fear, hatred, adulation, and orgiastic triumph. In other words it is necessary that he should have the mental- ity appropriate to a state of war. It does not matter whether the war is actually happening, and, since no decisive victory is possible, it does not matter whether the war is going well or badly. All that is needed is that a state of war should ex- ist. The splitting of the intelligence which the Party requires of its members, and which is more easily achieved in an at- mosphere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up the ranks one goes, the more marked it becomes. It is precisely in the Inner Party that war hysteria and hatred of the enemy are strongest. In his capacity as an administra- tor, it is often necessary for a member of the Inner Party to know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may often be aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening or is being waged for purposes quite other than the declared ones: but such knowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of DOUBLETHINK. Mean- while no Inner Party member wavers for an instant in his mystical belief that the war is real, and that it is bound to end victoriously, with Oceania the undisputed master of \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
the entire world.\uc0\u8232 All members of the Inner Party believe in this coming \
conquest as an article of faith. It is to be achieved either by gradually acquiring more and more territory and so build- ing up an overwhelming preponderance of power, or by the discovery of some new and unanswerable weapon. The search for new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few remaining activities in which the inventive or speculative type of mind can find any outlet. In Ocea- nia at the present day, Science, in the old sense, has almost ceased to exist. In Newspeak there is no word for \'91Science\'92. The empirical method of thought, on which all the scien- tific achievements of the past were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of Ingsoc. And even tech- nological progress only happens when its products can in some way be used for the diminution of human liberty. In all the useful arts the world is either standing still or go- ing backwards. The fields are cultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery. But in matters of vital importance\'97meaning, in effect, war and police espio- nage\'97the empirical approach is still encouraged, or at least tolerated. The two aims of the Party are to conquer the whole surface of the earth and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independent thought. There are therefore two great problems which the Party is concerned to solve. One is how to discover, against his will, what another human be- ing is thinking, and the other is how to kill several hundred million people in a few seconds without giving warning be- forehand. In so far as scientific research still continues, this \
44 1984 \
is its subject matter. The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor, studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions, gestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical torture; or he is chemist, physicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special subject as are relevant to the taking of life. In the vast laboratories of the Ministry of Peace, and in the experimental stations hidden in the Brazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost islands of the Ant- arctic, the teams of experts are indefatigably at work. Some are concerned simply with planning the logistics of future wars; others devise larger and larger rocket bombs, more and more powerful explosives, and more and more impen- etrable armour-plating; others search for new and deadlier gases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities as to destroy the vegetation of whole con- tinents, or for breeds of disease germs immunized against all possible antibodies; others strive to produce a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine un- der the water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-ship; others explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun\'92s rays through lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space, or producing artifi- cial earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat at the earth\'92s centre. \
But none of these projects ever comes anywhere near re- alization, and none of the three super-states ever gains a significant lead on the others. What is more remarkable is \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
that all three powers already possess, in the atomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that their present researches are likely to discover. Although the Party, ac- cording to its habit, claims the invention for itself, atomic bombs first appeared as early as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large scale about ten years later. At that time some hundreds of bombs were dropped on indus- trial centres, chiefly in European Russia, Western Europe, and North America. The effect was to convince the ruling groups of all countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organized society, and hence of their own power. Thereafter, although no formal agreement was ever made or hinted at, no more bombs were dropped. All three powers merely continue to produce atomic bombs and store them up against the decisive opportunity which they all believe will come sooner or later. And meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty or forty years. Helicopters are more used than they were formerly, bombing planes have been largely superseded by self-pro- pelled projectiles, and the fragile movable battleship has given way to the almost unsinkable Floating Fortress; but otherwise there has been little development. The tank, the submarine, the torpedo, the machine gun, even the rifle and the hand grenade are still in use. And in spite of the end- less slaughters reported in the Press and on the telescreens, the desperate battles of earlier wars, in which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were often killed in a few weeks, have never been repeated. \
None of the three super-states ever attempts any ma- 4 1984 \
noeuvre which involves the risk of serious defeat. When any large operation is undertaken, it is usually a surprise attack against an ally. The strategy that all three powers are following, or pretend to themselves that they are following, is the same. The plan is, by a combination of fighting, bar- gaining, and well-timed strokes of treachery, to acquire a ring of bases completely encircling one or other of the ri- val states, and then to sign a pact of friendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms for so many years as to lull suspicion to sleep. During this time rockets loaded with atomic bombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots; finally they will all be fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make retaliation impossible. It will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with the remaining world- power, in preparation for another attack. This scheme, it is hardly necessary to say, is a mere daydream, impossible of realization. Moreover, no fighting ever occurs except in the disputed areas round the Equator and the Pole: no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertaken. This explains the fact that in some places the frontiers between the superstates are arbitrary. Eurasia, for example, could easily conquer the British Isles, which are geographically part of Europe, or on the other hand it would be possible for Oceania to push its frontiers to the Rhine or even to the Vistula. But this would violate the principle, followed on all sides though never formulated, of cultural integrity. If Oceania were to con- quer the areas that used once to be known as France and Germany, it would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of great physical difficulty, or to assimi- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
late a population of about a hundred million people, who, so far as technical development goes, are roughly on the Oceanic level. The problem is the same for all three super- states. It is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be no contact with foreigners, except, to a limited extent, with war prisoners and coloured slaves. Even the of- ficial ally of the moment is always regarded with the darkest suspicion. War prisoners apart, the average citizen of Ocea- nia never sets eyes on a citizen of either Eurasia or Eastasia, and he is forbidden the knowledge of foreign languages. If he were allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that they are creatures similar to himself and that most of what he has been told about them is lies. The sealed world in which he lives would be broken, and the fear, hatred, and self-righteousness on which his morale depends might evaporate. It is therefore realized on all sides that however often Persia, or Egypt, or Java, or Ceylon may change hands, the main frontiers must never be crossed by anything ex- cept bombs. \
Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitly understood and acted upon: namely, that the conditions of life in all three super-states are very much the same. In Oce- ania the prevailing philosophy is called Ingsoc, in Eurasia it is called Neo-Bolshevism, and in Eastasia it is called by a Chinese name usually translated as Death-Worship, but perhaps better rendered as Obliteration of the Self. The citi- zen of Oceania is not allowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two philosophies, but he is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality and common \
48 1984 \
sense. Actually the three philosophies are barely distin- guishable, and the social systems which they support are not distinguishable at all. Everywhere there is the same py- ramidal structure, the same worship of semi-divine leader, the same economy existing by and for continuous warfare. It follows that the three super-states not only cannot con- quer one another, but would gain no advantage by doing so. On the contrary, so long as they remain in conflict they prop one another up, like three sheaves of corn. And, as usual, the ruling groups of all three powers are simultane- ously aware and unaware of what they are doing. Their lives are dedicated to world conquest, but they also know that it is necessary that the war should continue everlastingly and without victory. Meanwhile the fact that there IS no danger of conquest makes possible the denial of reality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and its rival systems of thought. Here it is necessary to repeat what has been said earlier, that by becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed its character. \
In past ages, a war, almost by definition, was something that sooner or later came to an end, usually in unmistak- able victory or defeat. In the past, also, war was one of the main instruments by which human societies were kept in touch with physical reality. All rulers in all ages have tried to impose a false view of the world upon their followers, but they could not afford to encourage any illusion that tended to impair military efficiency. So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, or some other result generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeat had to be \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 49 \
serious. Physical facts could not be ignored. In philosophy, or religion, or ethics, or politics, two and two might make five, but when one was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make four. Inefficient nations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle for efficiency was inimi- cal to illusions. Moreover, to be efficient it was necessary to be able to learn from the past, which meant having a fairly accurate idea of what had happened in the past. Newspa- pers and history books were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification of the kind that is practised today would have been impossible. War was a sure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the ruling classes were concerned it was probably the most important of all safeguards. While wars could be won or lost, no ruling class could be completely ir- responsible. \
But when war becomes literally continuous, it also ceases to be dangerous. When war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessity. Technical progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied or disregarded. \
As we have seen, researches that could be called scientific are still carried out for the purposes of war, but they are es- sentially a kind of daydreaming, and their failure to show results is not important. Efficiency, even military efficiency, is no longer needed. Nothing is efficient in Oceania except the Thought Police. Since each of the three super-states is unconquerable, each is in effect a separate universe within which almost any perversion of thought can be safely prac- tised. Reality only exerts its pressure through the needs of everyday life\'97the need to eat and drink, to get shelter and \
0 1984 \
clothing, to avoid swallowing poison or stepping out of top- storey windows, and the like. Between life and death, and between physical pleasure and physical pain, there is still a distinction, but that is all. Cut off from contact with the outer world, and with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in interstellar space, who has no way of know- ing which direction is up and which is down. The rulers of such a state are absolute, as the Pharaohs or the Caesars could not be. They are obliged to prevent their followers from starving to death in numbers large enough to be in- convenient, and they are obliged to remain at the same low level of military technique as their rivals; but once that minimum is achieved, they can twist reality into whatever shape they choose. \
The war, therefore, if we judge it by the standards of pre- vious wars, is merely an imposture. It is like the battles between certain ruminant animals whose horns are set at such an angle that they are incapable of hurting one anoth- er. But though it is unreal it is not meaningless. It eats up the surplus of consumable goods, and it helps to preserve the special mental atmosphere that a hierarchical society needs. War, it will be seen, is now a purely internal affair. In the past, the ruling groups of all countries, although they might recognize their common interest and therefore limit the destructiveness of war, did fight against one an- other, and the victor always plundered the vanquished. In our own day they are not fighting against one another at all. The war is waged by each ruling group against its own subjects, and the object of the war is not to make or prevent \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of society intact. The very word \'91war\'92, therefore, has become mislead- ing. It would probably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased to exist. The peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between the Neolithic Age and the early twentieth century has disappeared and been replaced by something quite different. The effect would be much the same if the three super-states, instead of fighting one another, should agree to live in perpetual peace, each inviolate within its own boundaries. For in that case each would still be a self-contained universe, freed for ever from the sobering influence of external danger. A peace that was truly permanent would be the same as a permanent war. This\'97although the vast majority of Party members under- stand it only in a shallower sense\'97is the inner meaning of the Party slogan: WAR IS PEACE. \
Winston stopped reading for a moment. Somewhere in remote distance a rocket bomb thundered. The blissful feel- ing of being alone with the forbidden book, in a room with no telescreen, had not worn off. Solitude and safety were physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tiredness of his body, the softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze from the window that played upon his cheek. The book fascinated him, or more exactly it reassured him. In a sense it told him nothing that was new, but that was part of the attraction. It said what he would have said, if it had been possible for him to set his scattered thoughts in or- der. It was the product of a mind similar to his own, but enormously more powerful, more systematic, less fear-rid- \
 1984 \
den. The best books, he perceived, are those that tell you what you know already. He had just turned back to Chapter I when he heard Julia\'92s footstep on the stair and started out of his chair to meet her. She dumped her brown tool-bag on the floor and flung herself into his arms. It was more than a week since they had seen one another. \
\'91I\'92ve got THE BOOK,\'92 he said as they disentangled them- selves. \
\'91Oh, you\'92ve got it? Good,\'92 she said without much interest, and almost immediately knelt down beside the oil stove to make the coffee. \
They did not return to the subject until they had been in bed for half an hour. The evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull up the counterpane. From below came the familiar sound of singing and the scrape of boots on the flagstones. The brawny red-armed woman whom Winston had seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture in the yard. There seemed to be no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro between the washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clothes pegs and breaking forth into lusty song. Julia had settled down on her side and seemed to be already on the point of falling asleep. He reached out for the book, which was lying on the floor, and sat up against the bedhead. \
\'91We must read it,\'92 he said. \'91You too. All members of the Brotherhood have to read it.\'92 \
\'91You read it,\'92 she said with her eyes shut. \'91Read it aloud. That\'92s the best way. Then you can explain it to me as you \
go.\'92\uc0\u8232 Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
The clock\'92s hands said six, meaning eighteen. They had three or four hours ahead of them. He propped the book against his knees and began reading: \
Chapter I Ignorance is Strength\uc0\u8232 Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end \
of the Neolithic Age, there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle, and the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne count- less different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the essential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibnum, however far it is pushed one way or the other \
\'91Julia, are you awake?\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes, my love, I\'92m listening. Go on. It\'92s marvellous.\'92 \
He continued reading: \
The aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcil- able. The aim of the High is to remain where they are. The aim of the Middle is to change places with the High. The aim of the Low, when they have an aim\'97for it is an abiding characteristic of the Low that they are too much crushed by drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outside their daily lives\'97is to abolish all distinc- tions and create a society in which all men shall be equal. \
Thus throughout history a struggle which is the same in its main outlines recurs over and over again. For long periods the High seem to be securely in power, but sooner or later \
4 1984 \
there always comes a moment when they lose either their belief in themselves or their capacity to govern efficiently, or both. They are then overthrown by the Middle, who en- list the Low on their side by pretending to them that they are fighting for liberty and justice. As soon as they have reached their objective, the Middle thrust the Low back into their old position of servitude, and themselves become the High. Presently a new Middle group splits off from one of the other groups, or from both of them, and the struggle begins over again. Of the three groups, only the Low are never even temporarily successful in achieving their aims. It would be an exaggeration to say that throughout history there has been no progress of a material kind. Even today, in a period of decline, the average human being is physical- ly better off than he was a few centuries ago. But no advance in wealth, no softening of manners, no reform or revolu- tion has ever brought human equality a millimetre nearer. From the point of view of the Low, no historic change has ever meant much more than a change in the name of their masters. \
By the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pat- tern had become obvious to many observers. There then rose schools of thinkers who interpreted history as a cy- clical process and claimed to show that inequality was the unalterable law of human life. This doctrine, of course, had always had its adherents, but in the manner in which it was now put forward there was a significant change. In the past the need for a hierarchical form of society had been the doc- trine specifically of the High. It had been preached by kings \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
and aristocrats and by the priests, lawyers, and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generally been soft- ened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world beyond the grave. The Middle, so long as it was struggling for power, had always made use of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity. Now, however, the concept of hu- man brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not yet in positions of command, but merely hoped to be so before long. In the past the Middle had made revolutions under the banner of equality, and then had established a fresh tyranny as soon as the old one was overthrown. The new Middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny be- forehand. Socialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was the last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past ages. But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the aim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openly abandoned. The new movements which appeared in the middle years of the century, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, Death-Worship, as it is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of perpetuating UNfreedom and INequality. These new movements, of course, grew out of the old ones and tended to keep their names and pay lip-service to their ideology. But the purpose of all of them was to arrest progress and freeze history at a chosen moment. The familiar pendulum swing was to happen once more, and then stop. As usual, the High were to be turned out by the Middle, who would \
 1984 \
then become the High; but this time, by conscious strategy, the High would be able to maintain their position perma- nently. \
The new doctrines arose partly because of the accu- mulation of historical knowledge, and the growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existed before the nine- teenth century. The cyclical movement of history was now intelligible, or appeared to be so; and if it was intelligible, then it was alterable. But the principal, underlying cause was that, as early as the beginning of the twentieth century, human equality had become technically possible. It was still true that men were not equal in their native talents and that functions had to be specialized in ways that favoured some individuals against others; but there was no longer any real need for class distinctions or for large differences of wealth. In earlier ages, class distinctions had been not only inevi- table but desirable. Inequality was the price of civilization. With the development of machine production, however, the case was altered. Even if it was still necessary for human beings to do different kinds of work, it was no longer neces- sary for them to live at different social or economic levels. \
Therefore, from the point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power, human equality was no longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger to be avert- ed. In more primitive ages, when a just and peaceful society was in fact not possible, it had been fairly easy to believe it. The idea of an earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state of brotherhood, without laws and with- out brute labour, had haunted the human imagination for \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
thousands of years. And this vision had had a certain hold even on the groups who actually profited by each histori- cal change. The heirs of the French, English, and American revolutions had partly believed in their own phrases about the rights of man, freedom of speech, equality before the law, and the like, and have even allowed their conduct to be influenced by them to some extent. But by the fourth decade of the twentieth century all the main currents of political thought were authoritarian. The earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly the moment when it became realizable. Every new political theory, by whatever name it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation. And in the general hardening of outlook that set in round about \
1930, practices which had been long abandoned, in some cases for hundreds of years\'97imprisonment without trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, public executions, torture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the depor- tation of whole populations\'97not only became common again, but were tolerated and even defended by people who considered themselves enlightened and progressive. \
It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, and counter-revolutions in all parts of the world that Ingsoc and its rivals emerged as fully worked- out political theories. But they had been foreshadowed by the various systems, generally called totalitarian, which had appeared earlier in the century, and the main outlines of the world which would emerge from the prevailing chaos had long been obvious. What kind of people would control this world had been equally obvious. The new aristocracy \
8 1984 \
was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists, technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, so- ciologists, teachers, journalists, and professional politicians. \
These people, whose origins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of the working class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world of monopoly in- dustry and centralized government. As compared with their opposite numbers in past ages, they were less avari- cious, less tempted by luxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, more conscious of what they were doing and more intent on crushing opposition. This last difference was cardinal. By comparison with that existing today, all the tyrannies of the past were half-hearted and inefficient. The ruling groups were always infected to some extent by lib- eral ideas, and were content to leave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to be uninterested in what their subjects were thinking. Even the Catholic Church of the Middle Ages was tolerant by modern standards. Part of the reason for this was that in the past no government had the power to keep its citizens under constant surveillance. The invention of print, however, made it easier to manipu- late public opinion, and the film and the radio carried the process further. With the development of television, and the technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmit simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end. Every citizen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching, could be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the police and in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
of communication closed. The possibility of enforcing not only complete obedience to the will of the State, but com- plete uniformity of opinion on all subjects, now existed for the first time. \
After the revolutionary period of the fifties and sixties, society regrouped itself, as always, into High, Middle, and Low. But the new High group, unlike all its forerunners, did not act upon instinct but knew what was needed to safeguard its position. It had long been realized that the only secure basis for oligarchy is collectivism. Wealth and privilege are most easily defended when they are possessed jointly. The so-called \'91abolition of private property\'92 which took place in the middle years of the century meant, in effect, the con- centration of property in far fewer hands than before: but with this difference, that the new owners were a group in- stead of a mass of individuals. Individually, no member of the Party owns anything, except petty personal belongings. Collectively, the Party owns everything in Oceania, be- cause it controls everything, and disposes of the products as it thinks fit. In the years following the Revolution it was able to step into this commanding position almost unop- posed, because the whole process was represented as an act of collectivization. It had always been assumed that if the capitalist class were expropriated, Socialism must follow: and unquestionably the capitalists had been expropriated. Factories, mines, land, houses, transport\'97everything had been taken away from them: and since these things were no longer private property, it followed that they must be public property. Ingsoc, which grew out of the earlier So- \
0 1984 \
cialist movement and inherited its phraseology, has in fact carried out the main item in the Socialist programme; with the result, foreseen and intended beforehand, that econom- ic inequality has been made permanent. \
But the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical soci- ety go deeper than this. There are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from power. Either it is conquered from without, or it governs so inefficiently that the masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontented Middle group to come into being, or it loses its own self- confidence and willingness to govern. These causes do not operate singly, and as a rule all four of them are present in some degree. A ruling class which could guard against all of them would remain in power permanently. Ultimately the determining factor is the mental attitude of the ruling class itself. \
After the middle of the present century, the first dan- ger had in reality disappeared. Each of the three powers which now divide the world is in fact unconquerable, and could only become conquerable through slow demographic changes which a government with wide powers can easi- ly avert. The second danger, also, is only a theoretical one. \
The masses never revolt of their own accord, and they never revolt merely because they are oppressed. Indeed, so long as they are not permitted to have standards of comparison, they never even become aware that they are oppressed. The recurrent economic crises of past times were totally un- necessary and are not now permitted to happen, but other and equally large dislocations can and do happen without \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
having political results, because there is no way in which discontent can become articulate. As for the problem of over-production, which has been latent in our society since the development of machine technique, it is solved by the device of continuous warfare (see Chapter III), which is also useful in keying up public morale to the necessary pitch. From the point of view of our present rulers, there- fore, the only genuine dangers are the splitting-off of a new group of able, under-employed, power-hungry people, and the growth of liberalism and scepticism in their own ranks. The problem, that is to say, is educational. It is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of the directing group and of the larger executive group that lies immediately below it. The consciousness of the masses needs only to be influenced in a negative way. \
Given this background, one could infer, if one did not know it already, the general structure of Oceanic society. At the apex of the pyramid comes Big Brother. Big Brother is in- fallible and all-powerful. Every success, every achievement, every victory, every scientific discovery, all knowledge, all wisdom, all happiness, all virtue, are held to issue directly from his leadership and inspiration. Nobody has ever seen Big Brother. He is a face on the hoardings, a voice on the telescreen. We may be reasonably sure that he will never die, and there is already considerable uncertainty as to when he was born. Big Brother is the guise in which the Party choos- es to exhibit itself to the world. His function is to act as a focusing point for love, fear, and reverence, emotions which are more easily felt towards an individual than towards an \
 1984 \
organization. Below Big Brother comes the Inner Party. Its numbers limited to six millions, or something less than 2 per cent of the population of Oceania. Below the Inner Party comes the Outer Party, which, if the Inner Party is de- scribed as the brain of the State, may be justly likened to the hands. Below that come the dumb masses whom we habitu- ally refer to as \'91the proles\'92, numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the population. In the terms of our earlier classification, the proles are the Low: for the slave population of the equatori- al lands who pass constantly from conqueror to conqueror, are not a permanent or necessary part of the structure. \
In principle, membership of these three groups is not he- reditary. The child of Inner Party parents is in theory not born into the Inner Party. Admission to either branch of the Party is by examination, taken at the age of sixteen. Nor is there any racial discrimination, or any marked domination of one province by another. Jews, Negroes, South Ameri- cans of pure Indian blood are to be found in the highest ranks of the Party, and the administrators of any area are always drawn from the inhabitants of that area. In no part of Oceania do the inhabitants have the feeling that they are a colonial population ruled from a distant capital. Ocea- nia has no capital, and its titular head is a person whose whereabouts nobody knows. Except that English is its chief LINGUA FRANCA and Newspeak its official language, it is not centralized in any way. Its rulers are not held together by blood-ties but by adherence to a common doctrine. It is true that our society is stratified, and very rigidly strat- ified, on what at first sight appear to be hereditary lines. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
There is far less to-and-fro movement between the differ- ent groups than happened under capitalism or even in the pre-industrial age. Between the two branches of the Party there is a certain amount of interchange, but only so much as will ensure that weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambitious members of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing them to rise. Proletarians, in practice, are not allowed to graduate into the Party. The most gifted among them, who might possibly become nu- clei of discontent, are simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated. But this state of affairs is not neces- sarily permanent, nor is it a matter of principle. The Party is not a class in the old sense of the word. It does not aim at transmitting power to its own children, as such; and if there were no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top, it would be perfectly prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks of the proletariat. In the crucial years, the fact that the Party was not a hereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition. The older kind of So- cialist, who had been trained to fight against something called \'91class privilege\'92 assumed that what is not hereditary cannot be permanent. He did not see that the continuity of an oligarchy need not be physical, nor did he pause to reflect that hereditary aristocracies have always been short- lived, whereas adoptive organizations such as the Catholic Church have sometimes lasted for hundreds or thousands of years. The essence of oligarchical rule is not father-to-son inheritance, but the persistence of a certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the dead upon the living. A \
4 1984 \
ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominate its successors. The Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but with perpetuating itself. WHO wields power is not important, provided that the hierarchical structure remains always the same. \
All the beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, mental attitudes that characterize our time are really designed to sustain the mystique of the Party and prevent the true nature of pres- ent-day society from being perceived. Physical rebellion, or any preliminary move towards rebellion, is at present not possible. From the proletarians nothing is to be feared. Left to themselves, they will continue from generation to gener- ation and from century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not only without any impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the world could be other than it is. They could only become dangerous if the advance of in- dustrial technique made it necessary to educate them more highly; but, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important, the level of popular education is actually declining. What opinions the masses hold, or do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference. They can be granted intellectual liberty because they have no intellect. In a Party member, on the other hand, not even the smallest deviation of opinion on the most unimportant subject can be toler- ated. \
A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thought Police. Even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is alone. Wherever he may be, asleep or awake, working or resting, in his bath or in bed, he can be inspected \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
without warning and without knowing that he is being in- spected. Nothing that he does is indifferent. His friendships, his relaxations, his behaviour towards his wife and children, the expression of his face when he is alone, the words he mutters in sleep, even the characteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized. Not only any actual mis- demeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, any change of habits, any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptom of an inner struggle, is certain to be detected. He has no freedom of choice in any direction whatever. On the other hand his actions are not regulated by law or by any clearly formulated code of behaviour. In Oceania there is no law. Thoughts and actions which, when detected, mean certain death are not formally forbidden, and the endless purges, arrests, tortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishment for crimes which have ac- tually been committed, but are merely the wiping-out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in the future. A Party member is required to have not only the right opinions, but the right instincts. Many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of him are never plainly stated, and could not be stated without laying bare the contradictions inherent in Ingsoc. If he is a person naturally orthodox (in Newspeak a GOODTHINKER), he will in all circumstanc- es know, without taking thought, what is the true belief or the desirable emotion. But in any case an elaborate men- tal training, undergone in childhood and grouping itself round the Newspeak words CRIMESTOP, BLACKWHITE, and DOUBLETHINK, makes him unwilling and unable to \
 1984 \
think too deeply on any subject whatever.\uc0\u8232 A Party member is expected to have no private emotions \
and no respites from enthusiasm. He is supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatred of foreign enemies and internal traitors, triumph over victories, and self-abasement before the power and wisdom of the Party. The discontents pro- duced by his bare, unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwards and dissipated by such devices as the Two Minutes Hate, and the speculations which might possibly induce a sceptical or rebellious attitude are killed in advance by his early acquired inner discipline. The first and simplest stage in the discipline, which can be taught even to young chil- dren, is called, in Newspeak, CRIMESTOP. CRIMESTOP means the faculty of stopping short, as though by instinct, at the threshold of any dangerous thought. It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing to perceive logi- cal errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if they are inimical to Ingsoc, and of being bored or repelled by any train of thought which is capable of leading in a heretical direction. CRIMESTOP, in short, means protec- tive stupidity. But stupidity is not enough. On the contrary, orthodoxy in the full sense demands a control over one\'92s own mental processes as complete as that of a contortion- ist over his body. Oceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that Big Brother is omnipotent and that the Party is infallible. But since in reality Big Brother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible, there is need for an unwea- rying, moment-to-moment flexibility in the treatment of facts. The keyword here is BLACKWHITE. Like so many \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
Newspeak words, this word has two mutually contradicto- ry meanings. Applied to an opponent, it means the habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the plain facts. Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness to say that black is white when Party discipline demands this. But it means also the ability to BELIEVE that black is white, and more, to KNOW that black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary. This de- mands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by the system of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known in Newspeak as DOUBLETHINK. \
The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is subsidiary and, so to speak, precaution- ary. The subsidiary reason is that the Party member, like the proletarian, tolerates present-day conditions partly be- cause he has no standards of comparison. He must be cut off from the past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is necessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors and that the average lev- el of material comfort is constantly rising. But by far the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is the need to safeguard the infallibility of the Party. It is not merely that speeches, statistics, and records of every kind must be constantly brought up to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party were in all cases right. It is also that no change in doctrine or in political alignment can ever be admitted. For to change one\'92s mind, or even one\'92s policy, is a confession of weakness. If, for example, Eurasia or Eastasia (whichever it may be) is the enemy today, then \
8 1984 \
that country must always have been the enemy. And if the facts say otherwise then the facts must be altered. Thus his- tory is continuously rewritten. This day-to-day falsification of the past, carried out by the Ministry of Truth, is as neces- sary to the stability of the regime as the work of repression and espionage carried out by the Ministry of Love. \
The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc. Past events, it is argued, have no objective existence, but survive only in written records and in human memories. The past is whatever the records and the memories agree upon. And since the Party is in full control of all records and in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows that the past is whatever the Party chooses to make it. It also follows that though the past is alterable, it never has been altered in any specific instance. For when it has been recreated in whatever shape is needed at the moment, then this new version IS the past, and no different past can ever have existed. This holds good even when, as often hap- pens, the same event has to be altered out of recognition several times in the course of a year. At all times the Party is in possession of absolute truth, and clearly the absolute can never have been different from what it is now. It will be seen that the control of the past depends above all on the training of memory. To make sure that all written re- cords agree with the orthodoxy of the moment is merely a mechanical act. But it is also necessary to REMEMBER that events happened in the desired manner. And if it is necessary to rearrange one\'92s memories or to tamper with written records, then it is necessary to FORGET that one \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
has done so. The trick of doing this can be learned like any other mental technique. It is learned by the majority of Par- ty members, and certainly by all who are intelligent as well as orthodox. In Oldspeak it is called, quite frankly, \'91reality control\'92. In Newspeak it is called DOUBLETHINK, though DOUBLETHINK comprises much else as well. \
DOUBLETHINK means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one\'92s mind simultaneously, and ac- cepting both of them. The Party intellectual knows in which direction his memories must be altered; he therefore knows that he is playing tricks with reality; but by the exercise of DOUBLETHINK he also satisfies himself that reality is not violated. The process has to be conscious, or it would not be carried out with sufficient precision, but it also has to be unconscious, or it would bring with it a feeling of falsity and hence of guilt. DOUBLETHINK lies at the very heart of In- gsoc, since the essential act of the Party is to use conscious deception while retaining the firmness of purpose that goes with complete honesty. To tell deliberate lies while genu- inely believing in them, to forget any fact that has become inconvenient, and then, when it becomes necessary again, to draw it back from oblivion for just so long as it is needed, to deny the existence of objective reality and all the while to take account of the reality which one denies\'97all this is indispensably necessary. Even in using the word DOUBLE- THINK it is necessary to exercise DOUBLETHINK. For by using the word one admits that one is tampering with reality; by a fresh act of DOUBLETHINK one erases this knowledge; and so on indefinitely, with the lie always one \
0 1984 \
leap ahead of the truth. Ultimately it is by means of DOU- BLETHINK that the Party has been able\'97and may, for all we know, continue to be able for thousands of years\'97to ar- rest the course of history. \
All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified or because they grew soft. Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed to adjust themselves to chang- ing circumstances, and were overthrown; or they became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should have used force, and once again were overthrown. They fell, that is to say, either through consciousness or through un- consciousness. It is the achievement of the Party to have produced a system of thought in which both conditions can exist simultaneously. And upon no other intellectual basis could the dominion of the Party be made permanent. If one is to rule, and to continue ruling, one must be able to dis- locate the sense of reality. For the secret of rulership is to combine a belief in one\'92s own infallibility with the Power to learn from past mistakes. \
It need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of DOUBLETHINK are those who invented DOUBLETHINK and know that it is a vast system of mental cheating. In our society, those who have the best knowledge of what is happening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is. In general, the greater the understanding, the greater the delusion; the more intelligent, the less sane. One clear illustration of this is the fact that war hysteria increas- es in intensity as one rises in the social scale. Those whose attitude towards the war is most nearly rational are the sub- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
ject peoples of the disputed territories. To these people the war is simply a continuous calamity which sweeps to and fro over their bodies like a tidal wave. Which side is win- ning is a matter of complete indifference to them. They are aware that a change of overlordship means simply that they will be doing the same work as before for new masters who treat them in the same manner as the old ones. The slightly more favoured workers whom we call \'91the proles\'92 are only intermittently conscious of the war. When it is necessary they can be prodded into frenzies of fear and hatred, but when left to themselves they are capable of forgetting for long periods that the war is happening. It is in the ranks of the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is found. World-conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know it to be impossible. This peculiar linking-together of opposites\'97knowledge with ignorance, cynicism with fanaticism\'97is one of the chief distinguish- ing marks of Oceanic society. The official ideology abounds with contradictions even when there is no practical reason for them. Thus, the Party rejects and vilifies every principle for which the Socialist movement originally stood, and it chooses to do this in the name of Socialism. It preaches a contempt for the working class unexampled for centuries past, and it dresses its members in a uniform which was at one time peculiar to manual workers and was adopted for that reason. It systematically undermines the solidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name which is a direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty. Even the names of the four Ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort \
 1984 \
of impudence in their deliberate reversal of the facts. The Ministry of Peace concerns itself with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Love with torture and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation. These contradictions are not accidental, nor do they result from ordinary hypoc- risy; they are deliberate exercises in DOUBLETHINK. For it is only by reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitely. In no other way could the ancient cy- cle be broken. If human equality is to be for ever averted\'97if the High, as we have called them, are to keep their places permanently\'97then the prevailing mental condition must be controlled insanity. \
But there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignored. It is; WHY should human equality be averted? Supposing that the mechanics of the process have been rightly described, what is the motive for this huge, accurately planned effort to freeze history at a particular moment of time? \
Here we reach the central secret. As we have seen. the mystique of the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, de- pends upon DOUBLETHINK But deeper than this lies the original motive, the never-questioned instinct that first led to the seizure of power and brought DOUBLETHINK, the \
Thought Police, continuous warfare, and all the other nec- essary paraphernalia into existence afterwards. This motive really consists... \
Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound. It seemed to him that Julia had been very still for some time past. She was lying on her side, na- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
ked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowed on her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes. Her breast rose and fell slowly and regularly. \
\'91Julia.\'92\uc0\u8232 No answer. \
\'91Julia, are you awake?\'92\uc0\u8232 No answer. She was asleep. He shut the book, put it care- \
fully on the floor, lay down, and pulled the coverlet over both of them. \
He had still, he reflected, not learned the ultimate secret. He understood HOW; he did not understand WHY. Chap- ter I, like Chapter III, had not actually told him anything that he did not know, it had merely systematized the knowl- edge that he possessed already. But after reading it he knew better than before that he was not mad. Being in a minority, even a minority of one, did not make you mad. There was truth and there was untruth, and if you clung to the truth even against the whole world, you were not mad. A yellow beam from the sinking sun slanted in through the window and fell across the pillow. He shut his eyes. The sun on his face and the girl\'92s smooth body touching his own gave him a strong, sleepy, confident feeling. He was safe, everything was all right. He fell asleep murmuring \'91Sanity is not sta- tistical,\'92 with the feeling that this remark contained in it a profound wisdom. \
*****\uc0\u8232 When he woke it was with the sensation of having slept \
for a long time, but a glance at the old-fashioned clock told him that it was only twenty-thirty. He lay dozing for a while; \
4 1984 \
then the usual deep-lunged singing struck up from the yard below: \
\'91It was only an \'91opeless fancy,\uc0\u8232 It passed like an Ipril dye,\u8232 But a look an\'92 a word an\'92 the dreams they stirred They \'91ave stolen my \'91eart awye!\'92 \
The driveling song seemed to have kept its popularity. You still heard it all over the place. It had outlived the Hate \
Song. Julia woke at the sound, stretched herself luxuriously, and got out of bed. \
\'91I\'92m hungry,\'92 she said. \'91Let\'92s make some more coffee. Damn! The stove\'92s gone out and the water\'92s cold.\'92 She picked the stove up and shook it. \'91There\'92s no oil in it.\'92 \
\'91We can get some from old Charrington, I expect.\'92 \
\'91The funny thing is I made sure it was full. I\'92m going to put my clothes on,\'92 she added. \'91It seems to have got colder.\'92 \
Winston also got up and dressed himself. The indefati- gable voice sang on: \
\'91They sye that time \'91eals all things,\uc0\u8232 They sye you can always forget;\u8232 But the smiles an\'92 the tears acrorss the years They twist my \'91eart-strings yet!\'92 \
As he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the window. The sun must have gone down behind the houses; it was not shining into the yard any longer. The flag- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
stones were wet as though they had just been washed, and he had the feeling that the sky had been washed too, so fresh and pale was the blue between the chimney-pots. Tireless- ly the woman marched to and fro, corking and uncorking herself, singing and falling silent, and pegging out more di- apers, and more and yet more. He wondered whether she took in washing for a living or was merely the slave of twen- ty or thirty grandchildren. Julia had come across to his side; together they gazed down with a sort of fascination at the sturdy figure below. As he looked at the woman in her char- acteristic attitude, her thick arms reaching up for the line, her powerful mare-like buttocks protruded, it struck him for the first time that she was beautiful. It had never before occurred to him that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up to monstrous dimensions by childbearing, then hardened, roughened by work till it was coarse in the grain like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful. But it was so, and after all, he thought, why not? The solid, contourless body, like a block of granite, and the rasping red skin, bore the same re- lation to the body of a girl as the rose-hip to the rose. Why should the fruit be held inferior to the flower? \
\'91She\'92s beautiful,\'92 he murmured.\uc0\u8232 \'91She\'92s a metre across the hips, easily,\'92 said Julia. \'91That is her style of beauty,\'92 said Winston. \
He held Julia\'92s supple waist easily encircled by his arm. From the hip to the knee her flank was against his. Out of their bodies no child would ever come. That was the one thing they could never do. Only by word of mouth, from mind to mind, could they pass on the secret. The woman \
 1984 \
down there had no mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertile belly. He wondered how many children she had given birth to. It might easily be fifteen. She had had her momentary flowering, a year, perhaps, of wild-rose beauty and then she had suddenly swollen like a fertilized fruit and grown hard and red and coarse, and then her life had been laundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, sweep- ing, polishing, mending, scrubbing, laundering, first for children, then for grandchildren, over thirty unbroken years. At the end of it she was still singing. The mystical reverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up with the aspect of the pale, cloudless sky, stretching away behind the chimney-pots into interminable distance. It was curi- ous to think that the sky was the same for everybody, in Eurasia or Eastasia as well as here. And the people under the sky were also very much the same\'97everywhere, all over the world, hundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignorant of one another\'92s existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, and yet almost exactly the same\'97people who had never learned to think but who were storing up in their hearts and bellies and muscles the power that would one day overturn the world. If there was hope, it lay in the proles! Without having read to the end of THE BOOK, he knew that that must be Goldstein\'92s final message. The future belonged to the proles. And could he be sure that when their time came the world they constructed would not be just as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party? Yes, because at the least it would be a world of sanity. Where there is equality there can be sanity. Sooner or later \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
it would happen, strength would change into consciousness. The proles were immortal, you could not doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard. In the end their awakening would come. And until that happened, though it might be a thousand years, they would stay alive against all \
the odds, like birds, passing on from body to body the vital- ity which the Party did not share and could not kill. \
\'91Do you remember,\'92 he said, \'91the thrush that sang to us, that first day, at the edge of the wood?\'92 \
\'91He wasn\'92t singing to us,\'92 said Julia. \'91He was singing to please himself. Not even that. He was just singing.\'92 \
The birds sang, the proles sang. the Party did not sing. All round the world, in London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and in the mysterious, forbidden lands beyond \
the frontiers, in the streets of Paris and Berlin, in the villag- es of the endless Russian plain, in the bazaars of China and Japan\'97everywhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrous by work and childbearing, toiling from birth to death and still singing. Out of those mighty loins a race of conscious beings must one day come. You were the dead, theirs was the future. But you could share in that future if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive the body, and passed on the secret doctrine that two plus two make four. \
\'91We are the dead,\'92 he said.\uc0\u8232 \'91We are the dead,\'92 echoed Julia dutifully.\u8232 \'91You are the dead,\'92 said an iron voice behind them.\u8232 They sprang apart. Winston\'92s entrails seemed to have \
turned into ice. He could see the white all round the irises of 8 1984 \
Julia\'92s eyes. Her face had turned a milky yellow. The smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbone stood out sharply, almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath. \
\'91You are the dead,\'92 repeated the iron voice.\uc0\u8232 \'91It was behind the picture,\'92 breathed Julia.\u8232 \'91It was behind the picture,\'92 said the voice. \'91Remain exactly \
where you are. Make no movement until you are ordered.\'92 It was starting, it was starting at last! They could do noth- \
ing except stand gazing into one another\'92s eyes. To run for life, to get out of the house before it was too late\'97no such thought occurred to them. Unthinkable to disobey the iron voice from the wall. There was a snap as though a catch had been turned back, and a crash of breaking glass. The picture had fallen to the floor uncovering the telescreen behind it. \
\'91Now they can see us,\'92 said Julia. \
\'91Now we can see you,\'92 said the voice. \'91Stand out in the middle of the room. Stand back to back. Clasp your hands behind your heads. Do not touch one another.\'92 \
They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia\'92s body shaking. Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own. He could just stop his teeth from chattering, but his knees were beyond his control. There was a sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outside. The yard seemed to be full of men. Something was being dragged across the stones. The woman\'92s singing had stopped abruptly. There was a long, rolling clang, as though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then a con- fusion of angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain. \
\'91The house is surrounded,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
\'91The house is surrounded,\'92 said the voice.\uc0\u8232 He heard Julia snap her teeth together. \'91I suppose we may \
as well say good-bye,\'92 she said.\uc0\u8232 \'91You may as well say good-bye,\'92 said the voice. And then \
another quite different voice, a thin, cultivated voice which Winston had the impression of having heard before, struck in; \'91And by the way, while we are on the subject, \'91Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head\'92!\'92 \
Something crashed on to the bed behind Winston\'92s back. The head of a ladder had been thrust through the window and had burst in the frame. Someone was climbing through \
the window. There was a stampede of boots up the stairs. The room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron- \
shod boots on their feet and truncheons in their hands. Winston was not trembling any longer. Even his eyes he barely moved. One thing alone mattered; to keep still, to keep still and not give them an excuse to hit you! A man with a smooth prize-fighter\'92s jowl in which the mouth was only a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheon meditatively between thumb and forefinger. Winston met his eyes. The feeling of nakedness, with one\'92s hands behind one\'92s head and one\'92s face and body all exposed, was almost \
unbearable. The man protruded the tip of a white tongue, licked the place where his lips should have been, and then passed on. There was another crash. Someone had picked up the glass paperweight from the table and smashed it to pieces on the hearth-stone. \
The fragment of coral, a tiny crinkle of pink like a sug- 80 1984 \
ar rosebud from a cake, rolled across the mat. How small, thought Winston, how small it always was! There was a gasp and a thump behind him, and he received a violent kick on the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance. One of the men had smashed his fist into Julia\'92s solar plexus, doubling her up like a pocket ruler. She was thrashing about on the floor, fighting for breath. Winston dared not turn his head even by a millimetre, but sometimes her livid, gasping face came within the angle of his vision. Even in his terror it was as though he could feel the pain in his own body, the deadly pain which nevertheless was less urgent than the struggle to get back her breath. He knew what it was like; the terrible, agonizing pain which was there all the while but could not be suffered yet, because before all else it was necessary to be able to breathe. Then two of the men hoisted her up by knees and shoulders, and carried her out of the room like a sack. Winston had a glimpse of her face, upside down, yel- low and contorted, with the eyes shut, and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek; and that was the last he saw of her. \
He stood dead still. No one had hit him yet. Thoughts which came of their own accord but seemed totally uninter- esting began to flit through his mind. He wondered whether they had got Mr Charrington. He wondered what they had done to the woman in the yard. He noticed that he bad- ly wanted to urinate, and felt a faint surprise, because he had done so only two or three hours ago. He noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nine, meaning twenty- one. But the light seemed too strong. Would not the light \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 81 \
be fading at twenty-one hours on an August evening? He wondered whether after all he and Julia had mistaken the time\'97had slept the clock round and thought it was twen- ty-thirty when really it was nought eight-thirty on the following morning. But he did not pursue the thought fur- ther. It was not interesting. \
There ws another, lighter step in the passage. Mr Charrington came into the room. The demeanour of the black-uniformed men suddenly became more sub- dued. Something had also changed in Mr Charrington\'92s appearance. His eye fell on the fragments of the glass pa- perweight. \
\'91Pick up those pieces,\'92 he said sharply. \
A man stooped to obey. The cockney accent had disap- peared; Winston suddenly realized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on the telescreen. Mr Char- rington was still wearing his old velvet jacket, but his hair, which had been almost white, had turned black. Also he was not wearing his spectacles. He gave Winston a single sharp glance, as though verifying his identity, and then paid no more attention to him. He was still recognizable, but he was not the same person any longer. His body had straightened, and seemed to have grown bigger. His face had undergone only tiny changes that had nevertheless worked a complete transformation. The black eyebrows were less bushy, the wrinkles were gone, the whole lines of the face seemed to have altered; even the nose seemed shorter. It was the alert, cold face of a man of about five-and-thirty. It occurred to Winston that for the first time in his life he was looking, \
8 1984 \
with knowledge, at a member of the Thought Police. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
Part Three \
84 1984 \
Chapter 1 \
\dn32 H\up0 e did not know where he was. Presumably he was in the Ministry of Love, but there was no way of mak- ing certain. He was in a high-ceilinged windowless cell with walls of glittering white porcelain. Concealed lamps flood- \
ed it with cold light, and there was a low, steady humming sound which he supposed had something to do with the air supply. A bench, or shelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken only by the door and, at the end op- posite the door, a lavatory pan with no wooden seat. There were four telescreens, one in each wall. \
There was a dull aching in his belly. It had been there ever since they had bundled him into the closed van and driven him away. But he was also hungry, with a gnaw- ing, unwholesome kind of hunger. It might be twenty-four hours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six. He still did not know, probably never would know, whether it had been morning or evening when they arrested him. Since he was arrested he had not been fed. \
He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossed on his knee. He had already learned to sit still. If you made unexpected movements they yelled at you from the telescreen. But the craving for food was growing upon him. What he longed for above all was a piece of bread. He had an idea that there were a few breadcrumbs in the \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
pocket of his overalls. It was even possible\'97he thought this because from time to time something seemed to tickle his leg\'97that there might be a sizeable bit of crust there. In the end the temptation to find out overcame his fear; he slipped a hand into his pocket. \
\'91Smith!\'92 yelled a voice from the telescreen. \'916079 Smith W.! Hands out of pockets in the cells!\'92 \
He sat still again, his hands crossed on his knee. Be- fore being brought here he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinary prison or a temporary lock-up used by the patrols. He did not know how long he had been there; some hours at any rate; with no clocks and no daylight it was hard to gauge the time. It was a noisy, evil- smelling place. They had put him into a cell similar to the one he was now in, but filthily dirty and at all times crowded by ten or fifteen people. The majority of them were common criminals, but there were a few political prisoners among them. He had sat silent against the wall, jostled by dirty bodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his belly to take much interest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astonishing difference in demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others. The Party prisoners were always silent and terrified, but the ordinary criminals seemed to care nothing for anybody. They yelled insults at the guards, fought back fiercely when their belongings were impound- ed, wrote obscene words on the floor, ate smuggled food which they produced from mysterious hiding-places in their clothes, and even shouted down the telescreen when it tried to restore order. On the other hand some of them seemed \
8 1984 \
to be on good terms with the guards, called them by nick- names, and tried to wheedle cigarettes through the spyhole in the door. The guards, too, treated the common criminals with a certain forbearance, even when they had to handle them roughly. There was much talk about the forced-labour camps to which most of the prisoners expected to be sent. It was \'91all right\'92 in the camps, he gathered, so long as you had good contacts and knew the ropes. There was bribery, favouritism, and racketeering of every kind, there was ho- mosexuality and prostitution, there was even illicit alcohol distilled from potatoes. The positions of trust were given only to the common criminals, especially the gangsters and the murderers, who formed a sort of aristocracy. All the dirty jobs were done by the politicals. \
There was a constant come-and-go of prisoners of every description: drug-peddlers, thieves, bandits, black-mar- keteers, drunks, prostitutes. Some of the drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combine to sup- press them. An enormous wreck of a woman, aged about sixty, with great tumbling breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down in her struggles, was carried in, kicking and shouting, by four guards, who had hold of her one at each corner. They wrenched off the boots with which she had been trying to kick them, and dumped her down across Winston\'92s lap, almost breaking his thigh-bones. The woman hoisted herself upright and followed them out with a yell of \'91F\'97\'97 bastards!\'92 Then, noticing that she was sit- ting on something uneven, she slid off Winston\'92s knees on to the bench. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
\'91Beg pardon, dearie,\'92 she said. \'91I wouldn\'92t \'91a sat on you, only the buggers put me there. They dono \'91ow to treat a lady, do they?\'92 She paused, patted her breast, and belched. \'91Par- don,\'92 she said, \'91I ain\'92t meself, quite.\'92 \
She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor. \'91Thass better,\'92 she said, leaning back with closed eyes. \'91Never keep it down, thass what I say. Get it up while it\'92s \
fresh on your stomach, like.\'92\uc0\u8232 She revived, turned to have another look at Winston and \
seemed immediately to take a fancy to him. She put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew him towards her, breath- ing beer and vomit into his face. \
\'91Wass your name, dearie?\'92 she said.\uc0\u8232 \'91Smith,\'92 said Winston.\u8232 \'91Smith?\'92 said the woman. \'91Thass funny. My name\'92s Smith \
too. Why,\'92 she added sentimentally, \'91I might be your moth- er!\'92 \
She might, thought Winston, be his mother. She was about the right age and physique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty years in a forced-la- bour camp. \
No one else had spoken to him. To a surprising extent the ordinary criminals ignored the Party prisoners. \'91The polITS,\'92 they called them, with a sort of uninterested con- tempt. The Party prisoners seemed terrified of speaking to anybody, and above all of speaking to one another. Only once, when two Party members, both women, were pressed close together on the bench, he overheard amid the din of voices a few hurriedly-whispered words; and in particular a \
88 1984 \
reference to something called \'91room one-oh-one\'92, which he did not understand. \
It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here. The dull pain in his belly never went away, but sometimes it grew better and sometimes worse, and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly. When it grew worse he thought only of the pain itself, and of his de- sire for food. When it grew better, panic took hold of him. \
There were moments when he foresaw the things that would happen to him with such actuality that his heart galloped and his breath stopped. He felt the smash of truncheons on his elbows and iron-shod boots on his shins; he saw himself grovelling on the floor, screaming for mercy through bro- ken teeth. He hardly thought of Julia. He could not fix his mind on her. He loved her and would not betray her; but that was only a fact, known as he knew the rules of arith- metic. He felt no love for her, and he hardly even wondered what was happening to her. He thought oftener of O\'92Brien, with a flickering hope. O\'92Brien might know that he had been arrested. The Brotherhood, he had said, never tried to save its members. But there was the razor blade; they would send the razor blade if they could. There would be perhaps five seconds before the guard could rush into the cell. The blade would bite into him with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that held it would be cut to the bone. Everything came back to his sick body, which shrank trem- bling from the smallest pain. He was not certain that he would use the razor blade even if he got the chance. It was more natural to exist from moment to moment, accepting \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 89 \
another ten minutes\'92 life even with the certainty that there was torture at the end of it. \
Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the walls of the cell. It should have been easy, but he always lost count at some point or another. More often he wondered where he was, and what time of day it was. At one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylight outside, and at the next equally certain that it was pitch darkness. In this place, he knew instinctively, the lights would never be turned out. It was the place with no darkness: he saw now why O\'92Brien had seemed to recognize the allusion. In the Ministry of Love there were no windows. His cell might be at the heart of the building or against its outer wall; it might be ten floors below ground, or thirty above it. He moved himself mentally from place to place, and tried to deter- mine by the feeling of his body whether he was perched high in the air or buried deep underground. \
There was a sound of marching boots outside. The steel door opened with a clang. A young officer, a trim black-uni- formed figure who seemed to glitter all over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featured face was like a wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway. He mo- tioned to the guards outside to bring in the prisoner they were leading. The poet Ampleforth shambled into the cell. \
The door clanged shut again.\uc0\u8232 Ampleforth made one or two uncertain movements from \
side to side, as though having some idea that there was an- other door to go out of, and then began to wander up and down the cell. He had not yet noticed Winston\'92s presence. \
90 1984 \
His troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre above the level of Winston\'92s head. He was shoeless; large, dirty toes were sticking out of the holes in his socks. He was also several days away from a shave. A scrubby beard covered his face to the cheekbones, giving him an air of ruffianism that went oddly with his large weak frame and nervous movements. \
Winston roused hirnself a little from his lethargy. He must speak to Ampleforth, and risk the yell from the tele- screen. It was even conceivable that Ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade. \
\'91Ampleforth,\'92 he said. \
There was no yell from the telescreen. Ampleforth paused, mildly startled. His eyes focused themselves slowly on Winston. \
\'91Ah, Smith!\'92 he said. \'91You too!\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91What are you in for?\'92\u8232 \'91To tell you the truth\'97\'92 He sat down awkwardly on the \
bench opposite Winston. \'91There is only one offence, is there not?\'92 he said. \
\'91And have you committed it?\'92 \'91Apparently I have.\'92 \
He put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment, as though trying to remember something. \
\'91These things happen,\'92 he began vaguely. \'91I have been able to recall one instance\'97a possible instance. It was an indiscretion, undoubtedly. We were producing a definitive edition of the poems of Kipling. I allowed the word \'91God\'92 to remain at the end of a line. I could not help it!\'92 he added al- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 91 \
most indignantly, raising his face to look at Winston. \'91It was impossible to change the line. The rhyme was \'91rod\'94. Do you realize that there are only twelve rhymes to \'91rod\'92 in the en- tire language? For days I had racked my brains. There WAS no other rhyme.\'92 \
The expression on his face changed. The annoyance passed out of it and for a moment he looked almost pleased. A sort of intellectual warmth, the joy of the pedant who has \
found out some useless fact, shone through the dirt and scrubby hair. \
\'91Has it ever occurred to you,\'92 he said, \'91that the whole his- tory of English poetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lacks rhymes?\'92 \
No, that particular thought had never occurred to Win- ston. Nor, in the circumstances, did it strike him as very important or interesting. \
\'91Do you know what time of day it is?\'92 he said. \
Ampleforth looked startled again. \'91I had hardly thought about it. They arrested me\'97it could be two days ago\'97per- haps three.\'92 His eyes flitted round the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhere. \'91There is no dif- ference between night and day in this place. I do not see how one can calculate the time.\'92 \
They talked desultorily for some minutes, then, without apparent reason, a yell from the telescreen bade them be silent. Winston sat quietly, his hands crossed. Ampleforth, too large to sit in comfort on the narrow bench, fidgeted from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round one knee, then round the other. The telescreen barked at him to \
9 1984 \
keep still. Time passed. Twenty minutes, an hour\'97it was difficult to judge. Once more there was a sound of boots outside. Winston\'92s entrails contracted. Soon, very soon, perhaps in five minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots would mean that his own turn had come. \
The door opened. The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell. With a brief movement of the hand he indi- cated Ampleforth. \
\'91Room 101,\'92 he said. \
Ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards, his face vaguely perturbed, but uncomprehending. \
What seemed like a long time passed. The pain in Win- ston\'92s belly had revived. His mind sagged round and round on the same trick, like a ball falling again and again into the same series of slots. He had only six thoughts. The pain in his belly; a piece of bread; the blood and the screaming; O\'92Brien; Julia; the razor blade. There was another spasm in his entrails, the heavy boots were approaching. As the door opened, the wave of air that it created brought in a power- ful smell of cold sweat. Parsons walked into the cell. He was wearing khaki shorts and a sports-shirt. \
This time Winston was startled into self-forgetfulness. \'91YOU here!\'92 he said. \
Parsons gave Winston a glance in which there was neither interest nor surprise, but only misery. He began walking jerkily up and down, evidently unable to keep still. Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was apparent that they were trembling. His eyes had a wide-open, staring look, as though he could not prevent himself from gazing at \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
something in the middle distance.\uc0\u8232 \'91What are you in for?\'92 said Winston.\u8232 \'91Thoughtcrime!\'92 said Parsons, almost blubbering. The \
tone of his voice implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous horror that such a word could be applied to himself. He paused opposite Winston and began eagerly appealing to him: \'91You don\'92t think they\'92ll shoot me, do you, old chap? They don\'92t shoot you if you haven\'92t actually done anything\'97only thoughts, which you can\'92t help? I know they give you a fair hearing. Oh, I trust them for that! They\'92ll know my record, won\'92t they? YOU know what kind of chap I was. Not a bad chap in my way. Not brainy, of course, but keen. I tried to do my best for the Party, didn\'92t I? I\'92ll get off with five years, don\'92t you think? Or even ten years? A chap like me could make himself pretty useful in a labour-camp. They wouldn\'92t shoot me for going off the rails just once?\'92 \
\'91Are you guilty?\'92 said Winston. \
\'91Of course I\'92m guilty!\'92 cried Parsons with a servile glance at the telescreen. \'91You don\'92t think the Party would arrest an innocent man, do you?\'92 His frog-like face grew calm- er, and even took on a slightly sanctimonious expression. \
\'91Thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing, old man,\'92 he said senten- tiously. \'91It\'92s insidious. It can get hold of you without your even knowing it. Do you know how it got hold of me? In my sleep! Yes, that\'92s a fact. There I was, working away, trying to do my bit\'97never knew I had any bad stuff in my mind at all. And then I started talking in my sleep. Do you know what they heard me saying?\'92 \
94 1984 \
He sank his voice, like someone who is obliged for medi- cal reasons to utter an obscenity. \
\'91\'92Down with Big Brother!\'92 Yes, I said that! Said it over and over again, it seems. Between you and me, old man, I\'92m glad they got me before it went any further. Do you know what I\'92m going to say to them when I go up before the tribu- nal? \'91Thank you,\'92 I\'92m going to say, \'91thank you for saving me before it was too late.\'91\'91 \
\'91Who denounced you?\'92 said Winston. \
\'91It was my little daughter,\'92 said Parsons with a sort of doleful pride. \'91She listened at the keyhole. Heard what I was saying, and nipped off to the patrols the very next day. Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh? I don\'92t bear her any grudge for it. In fact I\'92m proud of her. It shows I brought her up in the right spirit, anyway.\'92 \
He made a few more jerky movements up and down, several times, casting a longing glance at the lavatory pan. \
Then he suddenly ripped down his shorts.\uc0\u8232 \'91Excuse me, old man,\'92 he said. \'91I can\'92t help it. It\'92s the wait- \
ing.\'92\uc0\u8232 He plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan. \
Winston covered his face with his hands.\uc0\u8232 \'91Smith!\'92 yelled the voice from the telescreen. \'916079 Smith \
W! Uncover your face. No faces covered in the cells.\'92 Winston uncovered his face. Parsons used the lavatory, loudly and abundantly. It then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell stank abominably for hours after- \
wards.\uc0\u8232 Parsons was removed. More prisoners came and went, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
mysteriously. One, a woman, was consigned to \'91Room 101\'92, and, Winston noticed, seemed to shrivel and turn a differ- ent colour when she heard the words. A time came when, if it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon; or if it had been afternoon, then it would be mid- night. There were six prisoners in the cell, men and women. \
All sat very still. Opposite Winston there sat a man with a chinless, toothy face exactly like that of some large, harm- less rodent. His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom that it was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of food tucked away there. His pale-grey eyes flitted timorously from face to face and turned quickly away again when he caught anyone\'92s eye. \
The door opened, and another prisoner was brought in whose appearance sent a momentary chill through Win- ston. He was a commonplace, mean-looking man who might have been an engineer or technician of some kind. But what was startling was the emaciation of his face. It was like a skull. Because of its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and the eyes seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of somebody or something. \
The man sat down on the bench at a little distance from Winston. Winston did not look at him again, but the tor- mented, skull-like face was as vivid in his mind as though it had been straight in front of his eyes. Suddenly he real- ized what was the matter. The man was dying of starvation. The same thought seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the cell. There was a very faint stirring all \
9 1984 \
the way round the bench. The eyes of the chinless man kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, then turning guiltily away, then being dragged back by an irresistible attraction. Presently he began to fidget on his seat. At last he stood up, waddled clumsily across the cell, dug down into the pocket of his overalls, and, with an abashed air, held out a grimy piece of bread to the skull-faced man. \
There was a furious, deafening roar from the telescreen. The chinless man jumped in his tracks. The skull-faced man had quickly thrust his hands behind his back, as though \
demonstrating to all the world that he refused the gift. \'91Bumstead!\'92 roared the voice. \'912713 Bumstead J.! Let fall \
that piece of bread!\'92\uc0\u8232 The chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the \
floor.\uc0\u8232 \'91Remain standing where you are,\'92 said the voice. \'91Face the \
door. Make no movement.\'92\uc0\u8232 The chinless man obeyed. His large pouchy cheeks were \
quivering uncontrollably. The door clanged open. As the young officer entered and stepped aside, there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard with enormous arms and shoulders. He took his stand opposite the chin- less man, and then, at a signal from the officer, let free a frightful blow, with all the weight of his body behind it, full in the chinless man\'92s mouth. The force of it seemed almost to knock him clear of the floor. His body was flung across the cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatory seat. For a moment he lay as though stunned, with dark blood oozing from his mouth and nose. A very faint whimper- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
ing or squeaking, which seemed unconscious, came out of him. Then he rolled over and raised himself unsteadily on hands and knees. Amid a stream of blood and saliva, the two halves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth. \
The prisoners sat very still, their hands crossed on their knees. The chinless man climbed back into his place. Down one side of his face the flesh was darkening. His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloured mass with a black hole in the middle of it. \
From time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of his overalls. His grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more guiltily than ever, as though he were trying to discov- er how much the others despised him for his humiliation. \
The door opened. With a small gesture the officer indi- cated the skull-faced man. \
\'91Room 101,\'92 he said. \
There was a gasp and a flurry at Winston\'92s side. The man had actually flung himself on his knees on the floor, with his hand clasped together. \
\'91Comrade! Officer!\'92 he cried. \'91You don\'92t have to take me to that place! Haven\'92t I told you everything already? What else is it you want to know? There\'92s nothing I wouldn\'92t confess, nothing! Just tell me what it is and I\'92ll confess straight off. Write it down and I\'92ll sign it\'97anything! Not room 101!\'92 \
\'91Room 101,\'92 said the officer. \
The man\'92s face, already very pale, turned a colour Win- ston would not have believed possible. It was definitely, unmistakably, a shade of green. \
\'91Do anything to me!\'92 he yelled. \'91You\'92ve been starving me 98 1984 \
for weeks. Finish it off and let me die. Shoot me. Hang me. Sentence me to twenty-five years. Is there somebody else you want me to give away? Just say who it is and I\'92ll tell you anything you want. I don\'92t care who it is or what you do to them. I\'92ve got a wife and three children. The biggest of them isn\'92t six years old. You can take the whole lot of them and cut their throats in front of my eyes, and I\'92ll stand by and watch it. But not Room 101!\'92 \
\'91Room 101,\'92 said the officer. \
The man looked frantically round at the other prisoners, as though with some idea that he could put another victim in his own place. His eyes settled on the smashed face of the chinless man. He flung out a lean arm. \
\'91That\'92s the one you ought to be taking, not me!\'92 he shout- ed. \'91You didn\'92t hear what he was saying after they bashed his face. Give me a chance and I\'92ll tell you every word of it. HE\'92S the one that\'92s against the Party, not me.\'92 The guards stepped forward. The man\'92s voice rose to a shriek. \'91You didn\'92t hear him!\'92 he repeated. \'91Something went wrong with the telescreen. HE\'92S the one you want. Take him, not me!\'92 \
The two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms. But just at this moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one of the iron legs that sup- ported the bench. He had set up a wordless howling, like an animal. The guards took hold of him to wrench him loose, but he clung on with astonishing strength. For perhaps twenty seconds they were hauling at him. The prisoners sat quiet, their hands crossed on their knees, looking straight in front of them. The howling stopped; the man had no \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 99 \
breath left for anything except hanging on. Then there was a different kind of cry. A kick from a guard\'92s boot had bro- ken the fingers of one of his hands. They dragged him to his feet. \
\'91Room 101,\'92 said the officer. \
The man was led out, walking unsteadily, with head sunken, nursing his crushed hand, all the fight had gone out of him. \
A long time passed. If it had been midnight when the skull-faced man was taken away, it was morning: if morn- ing, it was afternoon. Winston was alone, and had been alone for hours. The pain of sitting on the narrow bench was such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by the telescreen. The piece of bread still lay where the chin- less man had dropped it. At the beginning it needed a hard effort not to look at it, but presently hunger gave way to thirst. His mouth was sticky and evil-tasting. The hum- ming sound and the unvarying white light induced a sort of faintness, an empty feeling inside his head. He would get up because the ache in his bones was no longer bearable, and then would sit down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of staying on his feet. Whenever his physical sensations were a little under control the ter- ror returned. Sometimes with a fading hope he thought of O\'92Brien and the razor blade. It was thinkable that the razor blade might arrive concealed in his food, if he were ever fed. More dimly he thought of Julia. Somewhere or other she was suffering perhaps far worse than he. She might be screaming with pain at this moment. He thought: \'91If I could \
00 1984 \
save Julia by doubling my own pain, would I do it? Yes, I would.\'92 But that was merely an intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ought to take it. He did not feel it. In this place you could not feel anything, except pain and foreknowledge of pain. Besides, was it possible, when you were actually suffering it, to wish for any reason that your own pain should increase? But that question was not an- swerable yet. \
The boots were approaching again. The door opened. O\'92Brien came in. \
Winston started to his feet. The shock of the sight had driven all caution out of him. For the first time in many years he forgot the presence of the telescreen. \
\'91They\'92ve got you too!\'92 he cried. \
\'91They got me a long time ago,\'92 said O\'92Brien with a mild, almost regretful irony. He stepped aside. From behind him there emerged a broad-chested guard with a long black truncheon in his hand. \
\'91You know this, Winston,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91Don\'92t deceive yourself. You did know it\'97you have always known it.\'92 \
Yes, he saw now, he had always known it. But there was no time to think of that. All he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard\'92s hand. It might fall anywhere; on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, on the elbow\'97\'97 \
The elbow! He had slumped to his knees, almost para- lysed, clasping the stricken elbow with his other hand. Everything had exploded into yellow light. Inconceivable, inconceivable that one blow could cause such pain! The light cleared and he could see the other two looking down \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 01 \
at him. The guard was laughing at his contortions. One question at any rate was answered. Never, for any reason on earth, could you wish for an increase of pain. Of pain you could wish only one thing: that it should stop. Nothing in the world was so bad as physical pain. In the face of pain there are no heroes, no heroes, he thought over and over as he writhed on the floor, clutching uselessly at his disabled left arm. \
0 1984 \
Chapter 2 \
\dn32 H\up0 e was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, ex- cept that it was higher off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that he could not move. Light \
that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his face. O\'92Brien was standing at his side, looking down at him in- tently. At the other side of him stood a man in a white coat, holding a hypodermic syringe. \
Even after his eyes were open he took in his surround- ings only gradually. He had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite different world, a sort of un- derwater world far beneath it. How long he had been down there he did not know. Since the moment when they arrest- ed him he had not seen darkness or daylight. Besides, his memories were not continuous. There had been times when consciousness, even the sort of consciousness that one has in sleep, had stopped dead and started again after a blank interval. But whether the intervals were of days or weeks or only seconds, there was no way of knowing. \
With that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started. Later he was to realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary, a routine interrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected. There was a long range of crimes\'97espionage, sabotage, and the like\'97to which ev- eryone had to confess as a matter of course. The confession \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 0 \
was a formality, though the torture was real. How many times he had been beaten, how long the beatings had con- tinued, he could not remember. Always there were five or six men in black uniforms at him simultaneously. Some- times it was fists, sometimes it was truncheons, sometimes it was steel rods, sometimes it was boots. There were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless as an animal, writhing his body this way and that in an endless, hopeless effort to dodge the kicks, and simply inviting more and yet more kicks, in his ribs, in his belly, on his elbows, on his shins, in his groin, in his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine. There were times when it went on and on un- til the cruel, wicked, unforgivable thing seemed to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he could not force hirnself into losing consciousness. There were times when his nerve so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating began, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough to make him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes. There were other times when he started out with the resolve of confessing nothing, when every word had to be forced out of him between gasps of pain, and there were times when he feebly tried to compromise, when he said to himself: \'91I will confess, but not yet. I must hold out till the pain becomes unbearable. Three more kicks, two more kicks, and then I will tell them what they want.\'92 Sometimes he was beaten till he could hardly stand, then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the stone floor of a cell, left to recuperate for a few hours, and then taken out and beaten again. There were also longer \
04 1984 \
periods of recovery. He remembered them dimly, because they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor. He remembered a cell with a plank bed, a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall, and a tin wash-basin, and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee. He remembered a surly barber arriv- ing to scrape his chin and crop his hair, and businesslike, unsympathetic men in white coats feeling his pulse, tapping his reflexes, turning up his eyelids, running harsh fingers over him in search for broken bones, and shooting needles into his arm to make him sleep. \
The beatings grew less frequent, and became mainly a threat, a horror to which he could be sent back at any mo- ment when his answers were unsatisfactory. His questioners now were not ruffians in black uniforms but Party intellec- tuals, little rotund men with quick movements and flashing spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods which lasted\'97he thought, he could not be sure\'97ten or twelve hours at a stretch. These other questioners saw to it that he was in constant slight pain, but it was not chiefly pain that they relied on. They slapped his face, wrung his ears, pulled his hair, made him stand on one leg, refused him leave to urinate, shone glaring lights in his face until his eyes ran with water; but the aim of this was simply to humiliate him and destroy his power of arguing and reasoning. Their real weapon was the merciless questioning that went on and on, hour after hour, tripping him up, laying traps for him, twist- ing everything that he said, convicting him at every step of lies and self-contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame as from nervous fatigue. Sometimes he would \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 0 \
weep half a dozen times in a single session. Most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatened at every hesita- tion to deliver him over to the guards again; but sometimes they would suddenly change their tune, call him comrade, appeal to him in the name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him sorrowfully whether even now he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to make him wish to undo the evil he had done. When his nerves were in rags after hours of questioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivel- ling tears. In the end the nagging voices broke him down more completely than the boots and fists of the guards. He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand that signed, whatever was demanded of him. His sole concern was to find out what they wanted him to confess, and then confess it quickly, before the bullying started anew. He confessed to the assassination of eminent Party members, the dis- tribution of seditious pamphlets, embezzlement of public funds, sale of military secrets, sabotage of every kind. He confessed that he had been a spy in the pay of the Easta- sian government as far back as 1968. He confessed that he was a religious believer, an admirer of capitalism, and a sex- ual pervert. He confessed that he had murdered his wife, although he knew, and his questioners must have known, that his wife was still alive. He confessed that for years he had been in personal touch with Goldstein and had been a member of an underground organization which had in- cluded almost every human being he had ever known. It was easier to confess everything and implicate everybody. Besides, in a sense it was all true. It was true that he had \
0 1984 \
been the enemy of the Party, and in the eyes of the Party there was no distinction between the thought and the deed. There were also memories of another kind. They stood \
out in his mind disconnectedly, like pictures with black- ness all round them. \
He was in a cell which might have been either dark or light, because he could see nothing except a pair of eyes. Near at hand some kind of instrument was ticking slow- ly and regularly. The eyes grew larger and more luminous. Suddenly he floated out of his seat, dived into the eyes, and was swallowed up. \
He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under dazzling lights. A man in a white coat was reading the dials. There was a tramp of heavy boots outside. The door clanged \
open. The waxed-faced officer marched in, followed by two guards. \
\'91Room 101,\'92 said the officer. \
The man in the white coat did not turn round. He did not look at Winston either; he was looking only at the dials. \
He was rolling down a mighty corridor, a kilometre wide, full of glorious, golden light, roaring with laughter and shouting out confessions at the top of his voice. He was confessing everything, even the things he had succeeded in holding back under the torture. He was relating the en- tire history of his life to an audience who knew it already. With him were the guards, the other questioners, the men in white coats, O\'92Brien, Julia, Mr Charrington, all rolling down the corridor together and shouting with laughter. Some dreadful thing which had lain embedded in the fu- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 0 \
ture had somehow been skipped over and had not happened. Everything was all right, there was no more pain, the last detail of his life was laid bare, understood, forgiven. \
He was starting up from the plank bed in the half-cer- tainty that he had heard O\'92Brien\'92s voice. All through his interrogation, although he had never seen him, he had had the feeling that O\'92Brien was at his elbow, just out of sight. It was O\'92Brien who was directing everything. It was he who set the guards on to Winston and who prevented them from killing him. It was he who decided when Winston should scream with pain, when he should have a respite, when he should be fed, when he should sleep, when the drugs should be pumped into his arm. It was he who asked the ques- tions and suggested the answers. He was the tormentor, he was the protector, he was the inquisitor, he was the friend. \
And once\'97Winston could not remember whether it was in drugged sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a moment of wakefulness\'97a voice murmured in his ear: \'91Don\'92t wor- ry, Winston; you are in my keeping. For seven years I have watched over you. Now the turning-point has come. I shall save you, I shall make you perfect.\'92 He was not sure whether it was O\'92Brien\'92s voice; but it was the same voice that had said to him, \'91We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,\'92 in that other dream, seven years ago. \
He did not remember any ending to his interrogation. There was a period of blackness and then the cell, or room, in which he now was had gradually materialized round him. \
He was almost flat on his back, and unable to move. His body was held down at every essential point. Even the back \
08 1984 \
of his head was gripped in some manner. O\'92Brien was look- ing down at him gravely and rather sadly. His face, seen from below, looked coarse and worn, with pouches under the eyes and tired lines from nose to chin. He was older than Winston had thought him; he was perhaps forty-eight or fifty. Under his hand there was a dial with a lever on top and figures running round the face. \
\'91I told you,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91that if we met again it would be here.\'92 \
\'91Yes,\'92 said Winston. \
Without any warning except a slight movement of O\'92Brien\'92s hand, a wave of pain flooded his body. It was a frightening pain, because he could not see what was hap- pening, and he had the feeling that some mortal injury was being done to him. He did not know whether the thing was really happening, or whether the effect was electrically pro- duced; but his body was being wrenched out of shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart. Although the pain had brought the sweat out on his forehead, the worst of all was the fear that his backbone was about to snap. He set his teeth and breathed hard through his nose, trying to keep silent as long as possible. \
\'91You are afraid,\'92 said O\'92Brien, watching his face, \'91that in another moment something is going to break. Your especial fear is that it will be your backbone. You have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping apart and the spinal fluid dripping out of them. That is what you are thinking, is it not, Winston?\'92 \
Winston did not answer. O\'92Brien drew back the lever on Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 09 \
the dial. The wave of pain receded almost as quickly as it had come. \
\'91That was forty,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91You can see that the num- bers on this dial run up to a hundred. Will you please remember, throughout our conversation, that I have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and to what- ever degree I choose? If you tell me any lies, or attempt to prevaricate in any way, or even fall below your usual level of intelligence, you will cry out with pain, instantly. Do you understand that?\'92 \
\'91Yes,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien\'92s manner became less severe. He resettled his \
spectacles thoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down. When he spoke his voice was gentle and patient. He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even a priest, anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish. \
\'91I am taking trouble with you, Winston,\'92 he said, \'91because you are worth trouble. You know perfectly well what is the matter with you. You have known it for years, though you have fought against the knowledge. You are mentally de- ranged. You suffer from a defective memory. You are unable to remember real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other events which never happened. Fortunately it is curable. You have never cured yourself of it, because you did not choose to. There was a small effort of the will that you were not ready to make. Even now, I am well aware, you are clinging to your disease under the impression that it is a virtue. Now we will take an example. At this moment, which power is Oceania at war with?\'92 \
10 1984 \
\'91When I was arrested, Oceania was at war with Eastasia.\'92 \
\'91With Eastasia. Good. And Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia, has it not?\'92 \
Winston drew in his breath. He opened his mouth to speak and then did not speak. He could not take his eyes away from the dial. \
\'91The truth, please, Winston. YOUR truth. Tell me what you think you remember.\'92 \
\'91I remember that until only a week before I was arrested, we were not at war with Eastasia at all. We were in alliance with them. The war was against Eurasia. That had lasted for four years. Before that\'97\'97\'92 \
O\'92Brien stopped him with a movement of the hand. \'91Another example,\'92 he said. \'91Some years ago you had a very serious delusion indeed. You believed that three men, \
three one-time Party members named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford\'97men who were executed for treachery and sabotage after making the fullest possible confession\'97 were not guilty of the crimes they were charged with. You believed that you had seen unmistakable documentary evi- dence proving that their confessions were false. There was a certain photograph about which you had a hallucination. You believed that you had actually held it in your hands. It was a photograph something like this.\'92 \
An oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between O\'92Brien\'92s fingers. For perhaps five seconds it was within the angle of Winston\'92s vision. It was a photograph, and there was no question of its identity. It was THE photograph. It was another copy of the photograph of Jones, Aaronson, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 11 \
and Rutherford at the party function in New York, which he had chanced upon eleven years ago and promptly de- stroyed. For only an instant it was before his eyes, then it was out of sight again. But he had seen it, unquestionably he had seen it! He made a desperate, agonizing effort to wrench the top half of his body free. It was impossible to move so much as a centimetre in any direction. For the moment he had even forgotten the dial. All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his fingers again, or at least to see it. \
\'91It exists!\'92 he cried. \'91No,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \
He stepped across the room. There was a memory hole in the opposite wall. O\'92Brien lifted the grating. Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirling away on the current of warm air; it was vanishing in a flash of flame. O\'92Brien turned away from the wall. \
\'91Ashes,\'92 he said. \'91Not even identifiable ashes. Dust. It does not exist. It never existed.\'92 \
\'91But it did exist! It does exist! It exists in memory. I re- member it. You remember it.\'92 \
\'91I do not remember it,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \
Winston\'92s heart sank. That was doublethink. He had a feeling of deadly helplessness. If he could have been certain that O\'92Brien was lying, it would not have seemed to matter. But it was perfectly possible that O\'92Brien had really forgot- ten the photograph. And if so, then already he would have forgotten his denial of remembering it, and forgotten the act of forgetting. How could one be sure that it was simple trickery? Perhaps that lunatic dislocation in the mind could \
1 1984 \
really happen: that was the thought that defeated him. O\'92Brien was looking down at him speculatively. More than ever he had the air of a teacher taking pains with a \
wayward but promising child.\uc0\u8232 \'91There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the \
past,\'92 he said. \'91Repeat it, if you please.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91\'92Who controls the past controls the future: who controls \
the present controls the past,\'91\'91 repeated Winston obedient- \
ly.\uc0\u8232 \'91\'92Who controls the present controls the past,\'91\'91 said \
O\'92Brien, nodding his head with slow approval. \'91Is it your opinion, Winston, that the past has real existence?\'92 \
Again the feeling of helplessness descended upon Win- ston. His eyes flitted towards the dial. He not only did not know whether \'91yes\'92 or \'91no\'92 was the answer that would save him from pain; he did not even know which answer he be- lieved to be the true one. \
O\'92Brien smiled faintly. \'91You are no metaphysician, Win- ston,\'92 he said. \'91Until this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence. I will put it more precisely. Does the past exist concretely, in space? Is there somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past is still happening?\'92 \
\'91No.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Then where does the past exist, if at all?\'92\u8232 \'91In records. It is written down.\'92\u8232 \'91In records. And\'97\'97?\'92\u8232 \'91In the mind. In human memories.\'92\u8232 \'91In memory. Very well, then. We, the Party, control all \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
records, and we control all memories. Then we control the past, do we not?\'92 \
\'91But how can you stop people remembering things?\'92 cried Winston again momentarily forgetting the dial. \'91It is invol- untary. It is outside oneself. How can you control memory? You have not controlled mine!\'92 \
O\'92Brien\'92s manner grew stern again. He laid his hand on the dial. \
\'91On the contrary,\'92 he said, \'91YOU have not controlled it. That is what has brought you here. You are here because you have failed in humility, in self-discipline. You would \
not make the act of submission which is the price of san- ity. You preferred to be a lunatic, a minority of one. Only the disciplined mind can see reality, Winston. You believe that reality is something objective, external, existing in its own right. You also believe that the nature of reality is self- evident. When you delude yourself into thinking that you see something, you assume that everyone else sees the same thing as you. But I tell you, Winston, that reality is not ex- ternal. Reality exists in the human mind, and nowhere else. Not in the individual mind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes: only in the mind of the Party, which is collective and immortal. Whatever the Party holds to be the truth, is truth. It is impossible to see reality except by looking through the eyes of the Party. That is the fact that you have got to relearn, Winston. It needs an act of self- destruction, an effort of the will. You must humble yourself before you can become sane.\'92 \
He paused for a few moments, as though to allow what 14 1984 \
he had been saying to sink in.\uc0\u8232 \'91Do you remember,\'92 he went on, \'91writing in your dia- \
ry, \'91Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four\'92?\'92 \
\'91Yes,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, \
with the thumb hidden and the four fingers extended. \'91How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Four.\'92\u8232 \'91And if the party says that it is not four but five\'97then \
how many?\'92 \'91Four.\'92 \
The word ended in a gasp of pain. The needle of the dial had shot up to fifty-five. The sweat had sprung out all over Winston\'92s body. The air tore into his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his teeth he could not stop. O\'92Brien watched him, the four fingers still ex- tended. He drew back the lever. This time the pain was only slightly eased. \
\'91How many fingers, Winston?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Four.\'92\u8232 The needle went up to sixty.\u8232 \'91How many fingers, Winston?\'92\u8232 \'91Four! Four! What else can I say? Four!\'92\u8232 The needle must have risen again, but he did not look at \
it. The heavy, stern face and the four fingers filled his vision. The fingers stood up before his eyes like pillars, enormous, \
blurry, and seeming to vibrate, but unmistakably four. \'91How many fingers, Winston?\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
\'91Four! Stop it, stop it! How can you go on? Four! Four!\'92 \'91How many fingers, Winston?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Five! Five! Five!\'92\u8232 \'91No, Winston, that is no use. You are lying. You still think \
there are four. How many fingers, please?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Four! five! Four! Anything you like. Only stop it, stop \
the pain!\'92\uc0\u8232 Abruptly he was sitting up with O\'92Brien\'92s arm round his \
shoulders. He had perhaps lost consciousness for a few sec- onds. The bonds that had held his body down were loosened. He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollably, his teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks. For a moment he clung to O\'92Brien like a baby, curiously com- forted by the heavy arm round his shoulders. He had the feeling that O\'92Brien was his protector, that the pain was something that came from outside, from some other source, and that it was O\'92Brien who would save him from it. \
\'91You are a slow learner, Winston,\'92 said O\'92Brien gently. \
\'91How can I help it?\'92 he blubbered. \'91How can I help seeing what is in front of my eyes? Two and two are four.\'92 \
Sometimes, Winston. Sometimes they are five. Some- times they are three. Sometimes they are all of them at once. \
You must try harder. It is not easy to become sane.\'92\uc0\u8232 He laid Winston down on the bed. The grip of his limbs tightened again, but the pain had ebbed away and the \
trembling had stopped, leaving him merely weak and cold. O\'92Brien motioned with his head to the man in the white coat, who had stood immobile throughout the proceedings. The man in the white coat bent down and looked closely \
1 1984 \
into Winston\'92s eyes, felt his pulse, laid an ear against his chest, tapped here and there, then he nodded to O\'92Brien. \
\'91Again,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \
The pain flowed into Winston\'92s body. The needle must be at seventy, seventy-five. He had shut his eyes this time. He knew that the fingers were still there, and still four. All that mattered was somehow to stay alive until the spasm was over. He had ceased to notice whether he was crying out or not. The pain lessened again. He opened his eyes. O\'92Brien had drawn back the lever. \
\'91How many fingers, Winston?\'92 \
\'91Four. I suppose there are four. I would see five if I could. I am trying to see five.\'92 \
\'91Which do you wish: to persuade me that you see five, or really to see them?\'92 \
\'91Really to see them.\'92 \'91Again,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \
Perhaps the needle was eighty\'97ninety. Winston could not intermittently remember why the pain was happening. Behind his screwed-up eyelids a forest of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in and out, disap- pearing behind one another and reappearing again. He was trying to count them, he could not remember why. He knew only that it was impossible to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterious identity between five and four. The pain died down again. When he opened his eyes it was to find that he was still seeing the same thing. In- numerable fingers, like moving trees, were still streaming past in either direction, crossing and recrossing. He shut \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
his eyes again.\uc0\u8232 \'91How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?\'92\u8232 \'91I don\'92t know. I don\'92t know. You will kill me if you do that \
again. Four, five, six\'97in all honesty I don\'92t know.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Better,\'92 said O\'92Brien.\u8232 A needle slid into Winston\'92s arm. Almost in the same in- \
stant a blissful, healing warmth spread all through his body. The pain was already half-forgotten. He opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at O\'92Brien. At sight of the heavy, lined face, so ugly and so intelligent, his heart seemed to turn over. If he could have moved he would have stretched out a hand and laid it on O\'92Brien\'92s arm. He had never loved him so deeply as at this moment, and not merely because he had stopped the pain. The old feeling, that at bottom it \
did not matter whether O\'92Brien was a friend or an enemy, had come back. O\'92Brien was a person who could be talked to. Perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be understood. O\'92Brien had tortured him to the edge of luna- cy, and in a little while, it was certain, he would send him to his death. It made no difference. In some sense that went deeper than friendship, they were intimates: somewhere or other, although the actual words might never be spoken, there was a place where they could meet and talk. O\'92Brien was looking down at him with an expression which suggest- ed that the same thought might be in his own mind. When he spoke it was in an easy, conversational tone. \
18 \
1984 \
\'91Do you know where you are, Winston?\'92 he said.\uc0\u8232 \'91I don\'92t know. I can guess. In the Ministry of Love.\'92 \'91Do you know how long you have been here?\'92 \
\'91I don\'92t know. Days, weeks, months\'97I think it is months.\'92 \
\'91And why do you imagine that we bring people to this place?\'92 \
\'91To make them confess.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91No, that is not the reason. Try again.\'92\u8232 \'91To punish them.\'92\u8232 \'91No!\'92 exclaimed O\'92Brien. His voice had changed extraor- \
dinarily, and his face had suddenly become both stern and animated. \'91No! Not merely to extract your confession, not to punish you. Shall I tell you why we have brought you here? To cure you! To make you sane! Will you understand, Win- ston, that no one whom we bring to this place ever leaves our hands uncured? We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you have committed. The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought is all we care about. We do not merely destroy our enemies, we change them. Do you un- derstand what I mean by that?\'92 \
He was bending over Winston. His face looked enormous because of its nearness, and hideously ugly because it was seen from below. Moreover it was filled with a sort of exal- tation, a lunatic intensity. Again Winston\'92s heart shrank. If it had been possible he would have cowered deeper into the bed. He felt certain that O\'92Brien was about to twist the dial out of sheer wantonness. At this moment, however, O\'92Brien turned away. He took a pace or two up and down. Then he continued less vehemently: \
\'91The first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are no martyrdoms. You have read of the religious \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 19 \
persecutions of the past. In the Middle Ages there was the Inquisitlon. It was a failure. It set out to eradicate heresy, and ended by perpetuating it. For every heretic it burned at the stake, thousands of others rose up. Why was that? Because the Inquisition killed its enemies in the open, and killed them while they were still unrepentant: in fact, it killed them because they were unrepentant. Men were dying be- cause they would not abandon their true beliefs. Naturally all the glory belonged to the victim and all the shame to the Inquisitor who burned him. Later, in the twentieth century, there were the totalitarians, as they were called. There were the German Nazis and the Russian Communists. The Rus- sians persecuted heresy more cruelly than the Inquisition had done. And they imagined that they had learned from the mistakes of the past; they knew, at any rate, that one must not make martyrs. Before they exposed their victims to public trial, they deliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity. They wore them down by torture and solitude until they were despicable, cringing wretches, confessing whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves with abuse, accusing and sheltering behind one another, whimpering for mercy. And yet after only a few years the same thing had happened over again. The dead men had become martyrs and their degradation was forgotten. Once again, why was it? In the first place, because the confessions that they had made were obviously extorted and untrue. We do not make mistakes of that kind. All the confessions that are uttered here are true. We make them true. And above all we do not allow the dead to rise up against us. You must \
0 1984 \
stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winston. Posterity will never hear of you. You will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. We shall turn you into gas and pour you into the stratosphere. Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. You will be annihilated in the past as well as in the future. You will never have existed.\'92 \
Then why bother to torture me? thought Winston, with a momentary bitterness. O\'92Brien checked his step as though Winston had uttered the thought aloud. His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a little narrowed. \
\'91You are thinking,\'92 he said, \'91that since we intend to de- stroy you utterly, so that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference\'97in that case, why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first? That is what you were thinking, was it not?\'92 \
\'91Yes,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien smiled slightly. \'91You are a flaw in the pattern, \
Winston. You are a stain that must be wiped out. Did I not tell you just now that we are different from the persecutors of the past? We are not content with negative obedience, nor even with the most abject submission. When finally you surrender to us, it must be of your own free will. We do not destroy the heretic because he resists us: so long as he re- sists us we never destroy him. We convert him, we capture his inner mind, we reshape him. We burn all evil and all illusion out of him; we bring him over to our side, not in ap- pearance, but genuinely, heart and soul. We make him one of ourselves before we kill him. It is intolerable to us that \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
an erroneous thought should exist anywhere in the world, however secret and powerless it may be. Even in the instant of death we cannot permit any deviation. In the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, proclaiming his heresy, exulting in it. Even the victim of the Russian purges could carry rebellion locked up in his skull as he walked down the passage waiting for the bullet. But we make the brain perfect before we blow it out. The command of the old despotisms was \'91Thou shalt not\'94. The command of the total- itarians was \'91Thou shalt\'94. Our command is \'91THOU ART\'94. No one whom we bring to this place ever stands out against us. Everyone is washed clean. Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once believed\'97Jones, Aar- onson, and Rutherford\'97in the end we broke them down. I took part in their interrogation myself. I saw them gradu- ally worn down, whimpering, grovelling, weeping\'97and in the end it was not with pain or fear, only with penitence. By the time we had finished with them they were only the shells of men. There was nothing left in them except sor- row for what they had done, and love of Big Brother. It was touching to see how they loved him. They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could die while their minds were still clean.\'92 \
His voice had grown almost dreamy. The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasm, was still in his face. He is not pretend- ing, thought Winston, he is not a hypocrite, he believes every word he says. What most oppressed him was the con- sciousness of his own intellectual inferiority. He watched the heavy yet graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out \
 1984 \
of the range of his vision. O\'92Brien was a being in all ways larger than himself. There was no idea that he had ever had, or could have, that O\'92Brien had not long ago known, ex- amined, and rejected. His mind CONTAINED Winston\'92s mind. But in that case how could it be true that O\'92Brien was mad? It must be he, Winston, who was mad. O\'92Brien halted and looked down at him. His voice had grown stern again. \
\'91Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completely you surrender to us. No one who has once gone astray is ever spared. And even if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, still you would never escape from us. What happens to you here is for ever. Understand that in advance. We shall crush you down to the point from which there is no coming back. Things will happen to you from which you could not recover, if you lived a thousand years. Never again will you be capable of ordinary human feeling. Everything will be dead inside you. Never again will you be capable of love, or friendship, or joy of living, or laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or in- tegrity. You will be hollow. We shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you with ourselves.\'92 \
He paused and signed to the man in the white coat. Winston was aware of some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head. O\'92Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that his face was almost on a level with Winston\'92s. \
\'91Three thousand,\'92 he said, speaking over Winston\'92s head to the man in the white coat. \
Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped them- Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
selves against Winston\'92s temples. He quailed. There was pain coming, a new kind of pain. O\'92Brien laid a hand reas- suringly, almost kindly, on his. \
\'91This time it will not hurt,\'92 he said. \'91Keep your eyes fixed on mine.\'92 \
At this moment there was a devastating explosion, or what seemed like an explosion, though it was not certain whether there was any noise. There was undoubtedly a blinding flash of light. Winston was not hurt, only prostrated. Although he had already been lying on his back when the thing hap- pened, he had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into that position. A terrific painless blow had flattened him out. Also something had happened inside his head. As his eyes regained their focus he remembered who he was, and where he was, and recognized the face that was gazing into his own; but somewhere or other there was a large patch of emptiness, as though a piece had been taken out of his brain. \
\'91It will not last,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91Look me in the eyes. What country is Oceania at war with?\'92 \
Winston thought. He knew what was meant by Oceania and that he himself was a citizen of Oceania. He also re- membered Eurasia and Eastasia; but who was at war with whom he did not know. In fact he had not been aware that there was any war. \
\'91I don\'92t remember.\'92 \
\'91Oceania is at war with Eastasia. Do you remember that now?\'92 \
4 \
1984 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia. Since the beginning of your life, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of history, the war has continued with- out a break, always the same war. Do you remember that?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91Eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had been condemned to death for treachery. You pre- tended that you had seen a piece of paper which proved them innocent. No such piece of paper ever existed. You in- vented it, and later you grew to believe in it. You remember now the very moment at which you first invented it. Do you remember that?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92 \
\'91Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you. You saw five fingers. Do you remember that?\'92 \
\'91Yes.\'92\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien held up the fingers of his left hand, with the \
thumb concealed.\uc0\u8232 \'91There are five fingers there. Do you see five fingers?\'92 \'91Yes.\'92\u8232 And he did see them, for a fleeting instant, before the \
scenery of his mind changed. He saw five fingers, and there was no deformity. Then everything was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and the bewilderment came crowd- ing back again. But there had been a moment\'97he did not know how long, thirty seconds, perhaps\'97of luminous cer- tainty, when each new suggestion of O\'92Brien\'92s had filled up a patch of emptiness and become absolute truth, and when two and two could have been three as easily as five, if that \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
were what was needed. It had faded but before O\'92Brien had dropped his hand; but though he could not recapture it, he could remember it, as one remembers a vivid experience at some period of one\'92s life when one was in effect a different person. \
\'91You see now,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91that it is at any rate possi- ble.\'92 \
\'91Yes,\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien stood up with a satisfied air. Over to his left \
Winston saw the man in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a syringe. O\'92Brien turned to Winston with a smile. In almost the old manner he resettled \
his spectacles on his nose.\uc0\u8232 \'91Do you remember writing in your diary,\'92 he said, \'91that \
it did not matter whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who understood you and could be talked to? You were right. I enjoy talking to you. Your mind appeals to me. It resembles my own mind except that you happen to be insane. Before we bring the session to an end you can ask me a few questions, if you choose.\'92 \
\'91Any question I like?\'92 \
\'91Anything.\'92 He saw that Winston\'92s eyes were upon the dial. \'91It is switched off. What is your first question?\'92 \
\'91What have you done with Julia?\'92 said Winston.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien smiled again. \'91She betrayed you, Winston. Im- \
mediately\'97unreservedly. I have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly. You would hardly recognize her if you saw her. All her rebelliousness, her deceit, her folly, her dirty-mindedness\'97everything has been burned out of her. \
 1984 \
It was a perfect conversion, a textbook case.\'92 \'91You tortured her?\'92 \
O\'92Brien left this unanswered. \'91Next question,\'92 he said. \'91Does Big Brother exist?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Of course he exists. The Party exists. Big Brother is the \
embodiment of the Party.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Does he exist in the same way as I exist?\'92 \'91You do not exist,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \
Once again the sense of helplessness assailed him. He knew, or he could imagine, the arguments which proved his own nonexistence; but they were nonsense, they were only a play on words. Did not the statement, \'91You do not ex- ist\'92, contain a logical absurdity? But what use was it to say so? His mind shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments with which O\'92Brien would demolish him. \
\'91I think I exist,\'92 he said wearily. \'91I am conscious of my own identity. I was born and I shall die. I have arms and legs. I occupy a particular point in space. No other solid object can occupy the same point simultaneously. In that sense, does Big Brother exist?\'92 \
\'91It is of no importance. He exists.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91Will Big Brother ever die?\'92\u8232 \'91Of course not. How could he die? Next question.\'92\u8232 \'91Does the Brotherhood exist?\'92\u8232 \'91That, Winston, you will never know. If we choose to set \
you free when we have finished with you, and if you live to be ninety years old, still you will never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No. As long as you live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind.\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
Winston lay silent. His breast rose and fell a little faster. He still had not asked the question that had come into his mind the first. He had got to ask it, and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it. There was a trace of amuse- ment in O\'92Brien\'92s face. Even his spectacles seemed to wear an ironical gleam. He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows what I am going to ask! At the thought the words burst out of him: \
\'91What is in Room 101?\'92 \
The expression on O\'92Brien\'92s face did not change. He an- swered drily: \
\'91You know what is in Room 101, Winston. Everyone knows what is in Room 101.\'92 \
He raised a finger to the man in the white coat. Evidently the session was at an end. A needle jerked into Winston\'92s arm. He sank almost instantly into deep sleep. \
8 1984 \
Chapter 3 \
\dn32 \'91\up0 There are three stages in your reintegration,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91There is learning, there is understanding, and there is ac- ceptance. It is time for you to enter upon the second stage.\'92 \
As always, Winston was lying flat on his back. But of late his bonds were looser. They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees a little and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from the elbow. The dial, also, had grown to be less of a terror. He could evade its pangs if he was quick-witted enough: it was chiefly when he showed stupidity that O\'92Brien pulled the lever. Sometimes they got through a whole session without use of the dial. He could not remember how many sessions there had been. \
The whole process seemed to stretch out over a long, indefi- nite time\'97weeks, possibly\'97and the intervals between the sessions might sometimes have been days, sometimes only an hour or two. \
\'91As you lie there,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91you have often won- dered\'97you have even asked me\'97why the Ministry of Love should expend so much time and trouble on you. And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially the same question. You could grasp the mechanics of the So- ciety you lived in, but not its underlying motives. Do you remember writing in your diary, \'91I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY\'92? It was when you thought about \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
\'91why\'92 that you doubted your own sanity. You have read THE BOOK, Goldstein\'92s book, or parts of it, at least. Did it tell you anything that you did not know already?\'92 \
\'91You have read it?\'92 said Winston. \
\'91I wrote it. That is to say, I collaborated in writing it. No book is produced individually, as you know.\'92 \
\'91Is it true, what it says?\'92 \
\'91As description, yes. The programme it sets forth is non- sense. The secret accumulation of knowledge\'97a gradual spread of enlightenment\'97ultimately a proletarian rebel- lion\'97the overthrow of the Party. You foresaw yourself that that was what it would say. It is all nonsense. The proletar- ians will never revolt, not in a thousand years or a million. \
They cannot. I do not have to tell you the reason: you know it already. If you have ever cherished any dreams of violent insurrection, you must abandon them. There is no way in which the Party can be overthrown. The rule of the Party is for ever. Make that the starting-point of your thoughts.\'92 \
He came closer to the bed. \'91For ever!\'92 he repeated. \'91And now let us get back to the question of \'91how\'92 and \'91why\'94. You understand well enough HOW the Party maintains itself in power. Now tell me WHY we cling to power. What is our motive? Why should we want power? Go on, speak,\'92 he added as Winston remained silent. \
Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another mo- ment or two. A feeling of weariness had overwhelmed him. The faint, mad gleam of enthusiasm had come back into O\'92Brien\'92s face. He knew in advance what O\'92Brien would say. \
That the Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only 0 1984 \
for the good of the majority. That it sought power because men in the mass were frail, cowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, and must be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger than themselves. That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and happiness, and that, for the great bulk of man- kind, happiness was better. That the party was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated sect doing evil that good might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that of oth- ers. The terrible thing, thought Winston, the terrible thing was that when O\'92Brien said this he would believe it. You could see it in his face. O\'92Brien knew everything. A thou- sand times better than Winston he knew what the world was really like, in what degradation the mass of human be- ings lived and by what lies and barbarities the Party kept them there. He had understood it all, weighed it all, and it made no difference: all was justified by the ultimate purpose. What can you do, thought Winston, against the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself, who gives your arguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy? \
\'91You are ruling over us for our own good,\'92 he said feebly. \'91You believe that human beings are not fit to govern them- \
selves, and therefore\'97\'97\'92\uc0\u8232 He started and almost cried out. A pang of pain had shot \
through his body. O\'92Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five. \
\'91That was stupid, Winston, stupid!\'92 he said. \'91You should know better than to say a thing like that.\'92 \
He pulled the lever back and continued:\uc0\u8232 Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
\'91Now I will tell you the answer to my question. It is this. The Party seeks power entirely for its own sake. We are not interested in the good of others; we are interested solely in power. Not wealth or luxury or long life or happiness: only power, pure power. What pure power means you will \
understand presently. We are different from all the oligar- chies of the past, in that we know what we are doing. All the others, even those who resembled ourselves, were cow- ards and hypocrites. The German Nazis and the Russian Communists came very close to us in their methods, but they never had the courage to recognize their own motives. They pretended, perhaps they even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for a limited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise where human be- ings would be free and equal. We are not like that. We know that no one ever seizes power with the intention of relin- quishing it. Power is not a means, it is an end. One does not establish a dictatorship in order to safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establish the dictator- ship. The object of persecution is persecution. The object of torture is torture. The object of power is power. Now do you begin to understand me?\'92 \
Winston was struck, as he had been struck before, by the tiredness of O\'92Brien\'92s face. It was strong and fleshy and bru- tal, it was full of intelligence and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself helpless; but it was tired. There were pouches under the eyes, the skin sagged from the cheekbones. O\'92Brien leaned over him, deliberately bringing the worn face nearer. \
 1984 \
\'91You are thinking,\'92 he said, \'91that my face is old and tired. You are thinking that I talk of power, and yet I am not even \
able to prevent the decay of my own body. Can you not un- derstand, Winston, that the individual is only a cell? The weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organism. Do you die when you cut your fingernails?\'92 \
He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one hand in his pocket. \
\'91We are the priests of power,\'92 he said. \'91God is power. But at present power is only a word so far as you are concerned. It is time for you to gather some idea of what power means. \
The first thing you must realize is that power is collective. The individual only has power in so far as he ceases to be an individual. You know the Party slogan: \'91Freedom is Slavery\'94. Has it ever occurred to you that it is reversible? Slavery is \
freedom. Alone\'97free\'97the human being is always defeated. It must be so, because every human being is doomed to die, which is the greatest of all failures. But if he can make com- plete, utter submission, if he can escape from his identity, if he can merge himself in the Party so that he IS the Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal. The second thing for you to realize is that power is power over human beings. Over the body\'97but, above all, over the mind. Power over matter\'97external reality, as you would call it\'97is not impor- tant. Already our control over matter is absolute.\'92 \
For a moment Winston ignored the dial. He made a vio- lent effort to raise himself into a sitting position, and merely succeeded in wrenching his body painfully. \
\'91But how can you control matter?\'92 he burst out. \'91You don\'92t Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
even control the climate or the law of gravity. And there are disease, pain, death\'97\'97\'92 \
O\'92Brien silenced him by a movement of his hand. \'91We control matter because we control the mind. Reality is in- side the skull. You will learn by degrees, Winston. There is nothing that we could not do. Invisibility, levitation\'97any- thing. I could float off this floor like a soap bubble if I wish to. I do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it. You must get rid of those nineteenth-century ideas about the laws of Nature. We make the laws of Nature.\'92 \
\'91But you do not! You are not even masters of this planet. What about Eurasia and Eastasia? You have not conquered them yet.\'92 \
\'91Unimportant. We shall conquer them when it suits us. And if we did not, what difference would it make? We can \
shut them out of existence. Oceania is the world.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91But the world itself is only a speck of dust. And man is \
tiny\'97helpless! How long has he been in existence? For mil- lions of years the earth was uninhabited.\'92 \
\'91Nonsense. The earth is as old as we are, no older. How could it be older? Nothing exists except through human consciousness.\'92 \
\'91But the rocks are full of the bones of extinct animals\'97 mammoths and mastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was ever heard of.\'92 \
\'91Have you ever seen those bones, Winston? Of course not. Nineteenth-century biologists invented them. Before man there was nothing. After man, if he could come to an end, there would be nothing. Outside man there is nothing.\'92 \
4 1984 \
\'91But the whole universe is outside us. Look at the stars! Some of them are a million light-years away. They are out of our reach for ever.\'92 \
\'91What are the stars?\'92 said O\'92Brien indifferently. \'91They are bits of fire a few kilometres away. We could reach them if we wanted to. Or we could blot them out. The earth is the cen- tre of the universe. The sun and the stars go round it.\'92 \
Winston made another convulsive movement. This time he did not say anything. O\'92Brien continued as though an- swering a spoken objection: \
\'91For certain purposes, of course, that is not true. When we navigate the ocean, or when we predict an eclipse, we of- ten find it convenient to assume that the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions upon millions of ki- lometres away. But what of it? Do you suppose it is beyond us to produce a dual system of astronomy? The stars can be near or distant, according as we need them. Do you suppose our mathematicians are unequal to that? Have you forgot- ten doublethink?\'92 \
Winston shrank back upon the bed. Whatever he said, the swift answer crushed him like a bludgeon. And yet he knew, he KNEW, that he was in the right. The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind\'97surely there must be some way of demonstrating that it was false? Had it not been exposed long ago as a fallacy? There was even a name for it, which he had forgotten. A faint smile twitched the corners of O\'92Brien\'92s mouth as he looked down at him. \
\'91I told you, Winston,\'92 he said, \'91that metaphysics is not your strong point. The word you are trying to think of is \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
solipsism. But you are mistaken. This is not solipsism. Col- lective solipsism, if you like. But that is a different thing: in fact, the opposite thing. All this is a digression,\'92 he added in a different tone. \'91The real power, the power we have to fight for night and day, is not power over things, but over men.\'92 He paused, and for a moment assumed again his air of a schoolmaster questioning a promising pupil: \'91How does one man assert his power over another, Winston?\'92 \
Winston thought. \'91By making him suffer,\'92 he said. \
\'91Exactly. By making him suffer. Obedience is not enough. Unless he is suffering, how can you be sure that he is obey- ing your will and not his own? Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation. Power is in tearing human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choosing. Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are creating? It is the exact opposite of the stupid hedonis- tic Utopias that the old reformers imagined. A world of fear and treachery and torment, a world of trampling and being trampled upon, a world which will grow not less but MORE merciless as it refines itself. Progress in our world will be progress towards more pain. The old civilizations claimed that they were founded on love or justice. Ours is founded upon hatred. In our world there will be no emotions ex- cept fear, rage, triumph, and self-abasement. Everything else we shall destroy\'97everything. Already we are break- ing down the habits of thought which have survived from before the Revolution. We have cut the links between child and parent, and between man and man, and between man and woman. No one dares trust a wife or a child or a friend \
 1984 \
any longer. But in the future there will be no wives and no friends. Children will be taken from their mothers at birth, as one takes eggs from a hen. The sex instinct will be eradicated. Procreation will be an annual formality like the renewal of a ration card. We shall abolish the orgasm. Our neurologists are at work upon it now. There will be no loy- alty, except loyalty towards the Party. There will be no love, except the love of Big Brother. There will be no laughter, ex- cept the laugh of triumph over a defeated enemy. There will be no art, no literature, no science. When we are omnipo- tent we shall have no more need of science. There will be no distinction between beauty and ugliness. There will be no curiosity, no enjoyment of the process of life. All competing pleasures will be destroyed. But always\'97do not forget this, Winston\'97always there will be the intoxication of power, constantly increasing and constantly growing subtler. Al- ways, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victory, the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless. If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face\'97for ever.\'92 \
He paused as though he expected Winston to speak. Winston had tried to shrink back into the surface of the bed again. He could not say anything. His heart seemed to be \
frozen. O\'92Brien went on:\uc0\u8232 \'91And remember that it is for ever. The face will always \
be there to be stamped upon. The heretic, the enemy of so- ciety, will always be there, so that he can be defeated and humiliated over again. Everything that you have undergone since you have been in our hands\'97all that will continue, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
and worse. The espionage, the betrayals, the arrests, the tor- tures, the executions, the disappearances will never cease. It will be a world of terror as much as a world of triumph. \
The more the Party is powerful, the less it will be tolerant: the weaker the opposition, the tighter the despotism. Gold- stein and his heresies will live for ever. Every day, at every moment, they will be defeated, discredited, ridiculed, spat upon and yet they will always survive. This drama that I have played out with you during seven years will be played out over and over again generation after generation, always in subtler forms. Always we shall have the heretic here at our mercy, screaming with pain, broken up, contemptible\'97and in the end utterly penitent, saved from himself, crawling to our feet of his own accord. That is the world that we are pre- paring, Winston. A world of victory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph: an endless pressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power. You are beginning, I can see, to realize what that world will be like. But in the end you will do more than understand it. You will accept it, wel- come it, become part of it.\'92 \
Winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak. \'91You can\'92t!\'92 he said weakly. \
\'91What do you mean by that remark, Winston?\'92 \
\'91You could not create such a world as you have just de- scribed. It is a dream. It is impossible.\'92 \
\'91Why?\'92 \
\'91It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty. It would never endure.\'92 \
8 \
1984 \
\'91Why not?\'92 \
\'91It would have no vitality. It would disintegrate. It would commit suicide.\'92 \
\'91Nonsense. You are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting than love. Why should it be? And if it were, what difference would that make? Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster. Suppose that we quicken the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty. Still what difference would it make? Can you not understand that the death of the individual is not death? The party is immor- tal.\'92 \
As usual, the voice had battered Winston into helpless- ness. Moreover he was in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement O\'92Brien would twist the dial again. And yet he could not keep silent. Feebly, without arguments, with nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror of what O\'92Brien had said, he returned to the attack. \
\'91I don\'92t know\'97I don\'92t care. Somehow you will fail. Some- thing will defeat you. Life will defeat you.\'92 \
\'91We control life, Winston, at all its levels. You are imag- ining that there is something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do and will turn against us. But we create human nature. Men are infinitely malleable. Or perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the prole- tarians or the slaves will arise and overthrow us. Put it out of your mind. They are helpless, like the animals. Humanity is the Party. The others are outside\'97irrelevant.\'92 \
\'91I don\'92t care. In the end they will beat you. Sooner or later they will see you for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces.\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
\'91Do you see any evidence that that is happening? Or any reason why it should?\'92 \
\'91No. I believe it. I KNOW that you will fail. There is something in the universe\'97I don\'92t know, some spirit, some principle\'97that you will never overcome.\'92 \
\'91Do you believe in God, Winston?\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91No.\'92\u8232 \'91Then what is it, this principle that will defeat us?\'92\u8232 \'91I don\'92t know. The spirit of Man.\'92\u8232 \'91And do you consider yourself a man?\'92\u8232 \'91Yes.\'92\u8232 \'91If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man. Your \
kind is extinct; we are the inheritors. Do you understand that you are ALONE? You are outside history, you are non- existent.\'92 His manner changed and he said more harshly: \
\'91And you consider yourself morally superior to us, with our lies and our cruelty?\'92 \
\'91Yes, I consider myself superior.\'92\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien did not speak. Two other voices were speaking. \
After a moment Winston recognized one of them as his own. It was a sound-track of the conversation he had had with O\'92Brien, on the night when he had enrolled himself in the Brotherhood. He heard himself promising to lie, to steal, to forge, to murder, to encourage drug-taking and prosti- tution, to disseminate venereal diseases, to throw vitriol in a child\'92s face. O\'92Brien made a small impatient gesture, as though to say that the demonstration was hardly worth making. Then he turned a switch and the voices stopped. \
40 \
1984 \
\'91Get up from that bed,\'92 he said. \
The bonds had loosened themselves. Winston lowered himself to the floor and stood up unsteadily. \
\'91You are the last man,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91You are the guard- ian of the human spirit. You shall see yourself as you are. Take off your clothes.\'92 \
Winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls to- gether. The zip fastener had long since been wrenched out of them. He could not remember whether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes at one time. Beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowish rags, just recognizable as the remnants of underclothes. As he slid them to the ground he saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the far end of the room. He approached it, then stopped short. An involuntary cry had broken out of him. \
\'91Go on,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91Stand between the wings of the mirror. You shall see the side view as well.\'92 \
He had stopped because he was frightened. A bowed, grey-coloured, skeleton-like thing was coming towards him. Its actual appearance was frightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself. He moved closer to the glass. The creature\'92s face seemed to be protruded, be- cause of its bent carriage. A forlorn, jailbird\'92s face with a nobby forehead running back into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, and battered-looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce and watchful. The cheeks were seamed, the mouth had a drawn-in look. Certainly it was his own face, but it seemed to him that it had changed more than he had changed inside. The emotions it registered would be differ- ent from the ones he felt. He had gone partially bald. For the \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 41 \
first moment he had thought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the scalp that was grey. Except for his hands and a circle of his face, his body was grey all over with an- cient, ingrained dirt. Here and there under the dirt there were the red scars of wounds, and near the ankle the vari- cose ulcer was an inflamed mass with flakes of skin peeling off it. But the truly frightening thing was the emaciation of his body. The barrel of the ribs was as narrow as that of a skeleton: the legs had shrunk so that the knees were thicker than the thighs. He saw now what O\'92Brien had meant about seeing the side view. The curvature of the spine was aston- ishing. The thin shoulders were hunched forward so as to make a cavity of the chest, the scraggy neck seemed to be bending double under the weight of the skull. At a guess he would have said that it was the body of a man of sixty, suf- fering from some malignant disease. \
\'91You have thought sometimes,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91that my face\'97the face of a member of the Inner Party\'97looks old and worn. What do you think of your own face?\'92 \
He seized Winston\'92s shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing him. \
\'91Look at the condition you are in!\'92 he said. \'91Look at this filthy grime all over your body. Look at the dirt between your toes. Look at that disgusting running sore on your leg. Do you know that you stink like a goat? Probably you have ceased to notice it. Look at your emaciation. Do you see? I can make my thumb and forefinger meet round your bicep. I could snap your neck like a carrot. Do you know that you have lost twenty-five kilograms since you have been in our \
4 1984 \
hands? Even your hair is coming out in handfuls. Look!\'92 He plucked at Winston\'92s head and brought away a tuft of hair. \'91Open your mouth. Nine, ten, eleven teeth left. How many had you when you came to us? And the few you have left are \
dropping out of your head. Look here!\'92\uc0\u8232 He seized one of Winston\'92s remaining front teeth be- \
tween his powerful thumb and forefinger. A twinge of pain shot through Winston\'92s jaw. O\'92Brien had wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots. He tossed it across the cell. \
\'91You are rotting away,\'92 he said; \'91you are falling to pieces. What are you? A bag of filth. Now turn around and look into that mirror again. Do you see that thing facing you? That is the last man. If you are human, that is humanity. Now put your clothes on again.\'92 \
Winston began to dress himself with slow stiff move- ments. Until now he had not seemed to notice how thin and weak he was. Only one thought stirred in his mind: that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined. \
Then suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling of pity for his ruined body overcame him. Before he knew what he was doing he had collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst into tears. He was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle of bones in filthy underclothes sitting weeping in the harsh white light: but he could not stop himself. O\'92Brien laid a hand on his shoulder, almost kindly. \
\'91It will not last for ever,\'92 he said. \'91You can escape from it whenever you choose. Everything depends on yourself.\'92 \
\'91You did it!\'92 sobbed Winston. \'91You reduced me to this Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
state.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91No, Winston, you reduced yourself to it. This is what you \
accepted when you set yourself up against the Party. It was all contained in that first act. Nothing has happened that you did not foresee.\'92 \
He paused, and then went on:\uc0\u8232 \'91We have beaten you, Winston. We have broken you up. \
You have seen what your body is like. Your mind is in the same state. I do not think there can be much pride left in you. You have been kicked and flogged and insulted, you have screamed with pain, you have rolled on the floor in your own blood and vomit. You have whimpered for mercy, you have betrayed everybody and everything. Can you think of a single degradation that has not happened to you?\'92 \
Winston had stopped weeping, though the tears were still oozing out of his eyes. He looked up at O\'92Brien. \
\'91I have not betrayed Julia,\'92 he said.\uc0\u8232 O\'92Brien looked down at him thoughtfully. \'91No,\'92 he said; \
\'91no; that is perfectly true. You have not betrayed Julia.\'92\uc0\u8232 The peculiar reverence for O\'92Brien, which nothing seemed able to destroy, flooded Winston\'92s heart again. How intelligent, he thought, how intelligent! Never did O\'92Brien fail to understand what was said to him. Anyone else on \
earth would have answered promptly that he HAD be- trayed Julia. For what was there that they had not screwed out of him under the torture? He had told them everything he knew about her, her habits, her character, her past life; he had confessed in the most trivial detail everything that had happened at their meetings, all that he had said to her \
44 1984 \
and she to him, their black-market meals, their adulteries, their vague plottings against the Party\'97everything. And yet, in the sense in which he intended the word, he had not betrayed her. He had not stopped loving her; his feelings to- wards her had remained the same. O\'92Brien had seen what he meant without the need for explanation. \
\'91Tell me,\'92 he said, \'91how soon will they shoot me?\'92 \
\'91It might be a long time,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91You are a difficult case. But don\'92t give up hope. Everyone is cured sooner or later. In the end we shall shoot you.\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
Chapter 4 \
\dn32 H\up0 e was much better. He was growing fatter and stronger every day, if it was proper to speak of days.\uc0\u8232 The white light and the humming sound were the same \
as ever, but the cell was a little more comfortable than the others he had been in. There was a pillow and a mattress on the plank bed, and a stool to sit on. They had given him a bath, and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequent- ly in a tin basin. They even gave him warm water to wash with. They had given him new underclothes and a clean suit of overalls. They had dressed his varicose ulcer with sooth- ing ointment. They had pulled out the remnants of his teeth and given him a new set of dentures. \
Weeks or months must have passed. It would have been possible now to keep count of the passage of time, if he had felt any interest in doing so, since he was being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals. He was getting, he judged, three meals in the twenty-four hours; sometimes he won- dered dimly whether he was getting them by night or by day. \
The food was surprisingly good, with meat at every third meal. Once there was even a packet of cigarettes. He had no matches, but the never-speaking guard who brought his food would give him a light. The first time he tried to smoke it made him sick, but he persevered, and spun the packet out for a long time, smoking half a cigarette after each meal. \
4 1984 \
They had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to the corner. At first he made no use of it. Even when he was awake he was completely torpid. Often he would lie from one meal to the next almost without stirring, some- times asleep, sometimes waking into vague reveries in which it was too much trouble to open his eyes. He had long grown used to sleeping with a strong light on his face. It seemed to make no difference, except that one\'92s dreams were more coherent. He dreamed a great deal all through this time, and they were always happy dreams. He was in the Golden Country, or he was sitting among enormous glorious, sunlit ruins, with his mother, with Julia, with O\'92Brien\'97not do- ing anything, merely sitting in the sun, talking of peaceful things. Such thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his dreams. He seemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort, now that the stimulus of pain had been removed. He was not bored, he had no desire for conversa- tion or distraction. Merely to be alone, not to be beaten or questioned, to have enough to eat, and to be clean all over, was completely satisfying. \
By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt no impulse to get off the bed. All he cared for was to lie quiet and feel the strength gathering in his body. He would finger himself here and there, trying to make sure that it was not an illusion that his muscles were growing round- er and his skin tauter. Finally it was established beyond a doubt that he was growing fatter; his thighs were now defi- nitely thicker than his knees. After that, reluctantly at first, he began exercising himself regularly. In a little while he \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 4 \
could walk three kilometres, measured by pacing the cell, and his bowed shoulders were growing straighter. He at- tempted more elaborate exercises, and was astonished and humiliated to find what things he could not do. He could not move out of a walk, he could not hold his stool out at arm\'92s length, he could not stand on one leg without falling over. He squatted down on his heels, and found that with agonizing pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself to a standing position. He lay flat on his belly and tried to lift his weight by his hands. It was hopeless, he could not raise himself a centimetre. But after a few more days\'97a few more mealtimes\'97even that feat was accomplished. A time came when he could do it six times running. He began to grow actually proud of his body, and to cherish an inter- mittent belief that his face also was growing back to normal. Only when he chanced to put his hand on his bald scalp did he remember the seamed, ruined face that had looked back at him out of the mirror. \
His mind grew more active. He sat down on the plank bed, his back against the wall and the slate on his knees, and set to work deliberately at the task of re-educating him- self. \
He had capitulated, that was agreed. In reality, as he saw now, he had been ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision. From the moment when he was inside the Ministry of Love\'97and yes, even during those minutes when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the telescreen told them what to do\'97he had grasped the frivolity, the shallowness of his attempt to set himself \
48 1984 \
up against the power of the Party. He knew now that for seven years the Thought Police had watched him like a bee- tle under a magnifying glass. There was no physical act, no word spoken aloud, that they had not noticed, no train of thought that they had not been able to infer. Even the speck of whitish dust on the cover of his diary they had careful- ly replaced. They had played sound-tracks to him, shown him photographs. Some of them were photographs of Julia and himself. Yes, even... He could not fight against the Party any longer. Besides, the Party was in the right. It must be so; how could the immortal, collective brain be mistaken? By what external standard could you check its judgements? Sanity was statistical. It was merely a question of learning to think as they thought. Only\'97\'97! \
The pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers. He be- gan to write down the thoughts that came into his head. He wrote first in large clumsy capitals: \
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY \
Then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it: \
TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE \
But then there came a sort of check. His mind, as though shying away from something, seemed unable to concen- trate. He knew that he knew what came next, but for the moment he could not recall it. When he did recall it, it was only by consciously reasoning out what it must be: it did not \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 49 \
come of its own accord. He wrote: \
GOD IS POWER \
He accepted everything. The past was alterable. The past never had been altered. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia. Jones, Aar- onson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimes they were charged with. He had never seen the photograph that dis- proved their guilt. It had never existed, he had invented it. He remembered remembering contrary things, but those were false memories, products of self-deception. How easy it all was! Only surrender, and everything else followed. It was like swimming against a current that swept you backwards however hard you struggled, and then suddenly deciding to turn round and go with the current instead of opposing it. Nothing had changed except your own attitude: the predes- tined thing happened in any case. He hardly knew why he had ever rebelled. Everything was easy, except\'97\'97! \
Anything could be true. The so-called laws of Na- ture were nonsense. The law of gravity was nonsense. \'91If I wished,\'92 O\'92Brien had said, \'91I could float off this floor like a soap bubble.\'92 Winston worked it out. \'91If he THINKS he floats off the floor, and if I simultaneously THINK I see him do it, then the thing happens.\'92 Suddenly, like a lump of submerged wreckage breaking the surface of water, the thought burst into his mind: \'91It doesn\'92t really happen. We imagine it. It is hallucination.\'92 He pushed the thought un- der instantly. The fallacy was obvious. It presupposed that \
0 1984 \
somewhere or other, outside oneself, there was a \'91real\'92 world where \'91real\'92 things happened. But how could there be such a world? What knowledge have we of anything, save through our own minds? All happenings are in the mind. Whatever happens in all minds, truly happens. \
He had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy, and he was in no danger of succumbing to it. He realized, never- theless, that it ought never to have occurred to him. The mind should develop a blind spot whenever a dangerous thought presented itself. The process should be automatic, instinctive. CRIMESTOP, they called it in Newspeak. \
He set to work to exercise himself in crimestop. He pre- sented himself with propositions\'97\'92the Party says the earth is flat\'92, \'91the party says that ice is heavier than water\'92\'97and trained himself in not seeing or not understanding the ar- guments that contradicted them. It was not easy. It needed great powers of reasoning and improvisation. The arith- metical problems raised, for instance, by such a statement as \'91two and two make five\'92 were beyond his intellectual grasp. It needed also a sort of athleticism of mind, an ability at one moment to make the most delicate use of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the crudest logical errors. Stupidity was as necessary as intelligence, and as difficult to attain. \
All the while, with one part of his mind, he wondered how soon they would shoot him. \'91Everything depends on yourself,\'92 O\'92Brien had said; but he knew that there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer. It might be ten minutes hence, or ten years. They might keep him \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
for years in solitary confinement, they might send him to a labour-camp, they might release him for a while, as they sometimes did. It was perfectly possible that before he was shot the whole drama of his arrest and interrogation would be enacted all over again. The one certain thing was that death never came at an expected moment. The tradition\'97 the unspoken tradition: somehow you knew it, though you never heard it said\'97was that they shot you from behind; always in the back of the head, without warning, as you walked down a corridor from cell to cell. \
One day\'97but \'91one day\'92 was not the right expression; just as probably it was in the middle of the night: once\'97he fell into a strange, blissful reverie. He was walking down the corridor, waiting for the bullet. He knew that it was com- ing in another moment. Everything was settled, smoothed out, reconciled. There were no more doubts, no more argu- ments, no more pain, no more fear. His body was healthy and strong. He walked easily, with a joy of movement and with a feeling of walking in sunlight. He was not any longer in the narrow white corridors in the Ministry of Love, he was in the enormous sunlit passage, a kilometre wide, down which he had seemed to walk in the delirium induced by drugs. He was in the Golden Country, following the foot- track across the old rabbit-cropped pasture. He could feel the short springy turf under his feet and the gentle sun- shine on his face. At the edge of the field were the elm trees, faintly stirring, and somewhere beyond that was the stream where the dace lay in the green pools under the willows. \
Suddenly he started up with a shock of horror. The  1984 \
sweat broke out on his backbone. He had heard himself cry aloud: \
\'91Julia! Julia! Julia, my love! Julia!\'92\uc0\u8232 For a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucina- \
tion of her presence. She had seemed to be not merely with him, but inside him. It was as though she had got into the texture of his skin. In that moment he had loved her far more than he had ever done when they were together and free. Also he knew that somewhere or other she was still alive and needed his help. \
He lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself. What had he done? How many years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness? \
In another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside. They could not let such an outburst go unpunished. They would know now, if they had not known before, that \
he was breaking the agreement he had made with them. He obeyed the Party, but he still hated the Party. In the old days he had hidden a heretical mind beneath an appear- ance of conformity. Now he had retreated a step further: in the mind he had surrendered, but he had hoped to keep the inner heart inviolate. He knew that he was in the wrong, but he preferred to be in the wrong. They would understand that\'97O\'92Brien would understand it. It was all confessed in that single foolish cry. \
He would have to start all over again. It might take years. He ran a hand over his face, trying to familiarize himself with the new shape. There were deep furrows in the cheeks, the cheekbones felt sharp, the nose flattened. Besides, since \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
last seeing himself in the glass he had been given a complete new set of teeth. It was not easy to preserve inscrutabili- ty when you did not know what your face looked like. In any case, mere control of the features was not enough. For the first time he perceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also hide it from yourself. You must know all the while that it is there, but until it is needed you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shape that could be given a name. From now onwards he must not only think right; he must feel right, dream right. And all the while he must keep his hatred locked up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of himself and yet unconnected with the rest of him, a kind of cyst. \
One day they would decide to shoot him. You could not tell when it would happen, but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess. It was always from behind, walking down a corridor. Ten seconds would be enough. In that time the world inside him could turn over. And then suddenly, without a word uttered, without a check in his step, without the changing of a line in his face\'97suddenly the camouflage would be down and bang! would go the bat- teries of his hatred. Hatred would fill him like an enormous roaring flame. And almost in the same instant bang! would go the bullet, too late, or too early. They would have blown his brain to pieces before they could reclaim it. The hereti- cal thought would be unpunished, unrepented, out of their reach for ever. They would have blown a hole in their own perfection. To die hating them, that was freedom. \
He shut his eyes. It was more difficult than accepting 4 1984 \
an intellectual discipline. It was a question of degrading himself, mutilating himself. He had got to plunge into the filthiest of filth. What was the most horrible, sickening thing of all? He thought of Big Brother. The enormous face (be- cause of constantly seeing it on posters he always thought of it as being a metre wide), with its heavy black moustache and the eyes that followed you to and fro, seemed to float into his mind of its own accord. What were his true feelings towards Big Brother? \
There was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage. The steel door swung open with a clang. O\'92Brien walked into the cell. Behind him were the waxen-faced officer and the black-uniformed guards. \
\'91Get up,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91Come here.\'92 \
Winston stood opposite him. O\'92Brien took Winston\'92s shoulders between his strong hands and looked at him closely. \
\'91You have had thoughts of deceiving me,\'92 he said. \'91That was stupid. Stand up straighter. Look me in the face.\'92 \
He paused, and went on in a gentler tone:\uc0\u8232 \'91You are improving. Intellectually there is very little \
wrong with you. It is only emotionally that you have failed to make progress. Tell me, Winston\'97and remember, no lies: you know that I am always able to detect a lie\'97tell me, what are your true feelings towards Big Brother?\'92 \
\'91I hate him.\'92 \
\'91You hate him. Good. Then the time has come for you to take the last step. You must love Big Brother. It is not enough to obey him: you must love him.\'92 \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
He released Winston with a little push towards the guards. \
 \
1984 \
\'91Room 101,\'92 he said. \
Chapter 5 \
\dn32 A\up0 t each stage of his imprisonment he had known, or seemed to know, whereabouts he was in the window- less building. Possibly there were slight differences in the air \
pressure. The cells where the guards had beaten him were below ground level. The room where he had been interro- gated by O\'92Brien was high up near the roof. This place was many metres underground, as deep down as it was possible to go. \
It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in. But he hardly noticed his surroundings. All he noticed was that there were two small tables straight in front of him, each covered with green baize. One was only a metre or two from him, the other was further away, near the door. He was strapped upright in a chair, so tightly that he could move nothing, not even his head. A sort of pad gripped his head from behind, forcing him to look straight in front of him. \
For a moment he was alone, then the door opened and O\'92Brien came in. \
\'91You asked me once,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91what was in Room 101. I told you that you knew the answer already. Everyone knows it. The thing that is in Room 101 is the worst thing \
in the world.\'92\uc0\u8232 The door opened again. A guard came in, carrying some- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
thing made of wire, a box or basket of some kind. He set it down on the further table. Because of the position in which O\'92Brien was standing. Winston could not see what the thing was. \
\'91The worst thing in the world,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91varies from individual to individual. It may be burial alive, or death by fire, or by drowning, or by impalement, or fifty other deaths. \
There are cases where it is some quite trivial thing, not even fatal.\'92 \
He had moved a little to one side, so that Winston had a better view of the thing on the table. It was an oblong wire cage with a handle on top for carrying it by. Fixed to the front of it was something that looked like a fencing mask, with the concave side outwards. Although it was three or four metres away from him, he could see that the cage was divided lengthways into two compartments, and that there was some kind of creature in each. They were rats. \
\'91In your case,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91the worst thing in the world happens to be rats.\'92 \
A sort of premonitory tremor, a fear of he was not certain what, had passed through Winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cage. But at this moment the meaning of the mask-like attachment in front of it suddenly sank into him. His bowels seemed to turn to water. \
\'91You can\'92t do that!\'92 he cried out in a high cracked voice. \'91You couldn\'92t, you couldn\'92t! It\'92s impossible.\'92 \
\'91Do you remember,\'92 said O\'92Brien, \'91the moment of pan- ic that used to occur in your dreams? There was a wall of blackness in front of you, and a roaring sound in your ears. \
8 1984 \
There was something terrible on the other side of the wall. You knew that you knew what it was, but you dared not drag it into the open. It was the rats that were on the other side \
of the wall.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91O\'92Brien!\'92 said Winston, making an effort to control his \
voice. \'91You know this is not necessary. What is it that you want me to do?\'92 \
O\'92Brien made no direct answer. When he spoke it was in the schoolmasterish manner that he sometimes affected. He looked thoughtfully into the distance, as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behind Winston\'92s back. \
\'91By itself,\'92 he said, \'91pain is not always enough. There are occasions when a human being will stand out against pain, even to the point of death. But for everyone there is something unendurable\'97something that cannot be con- templated. Courage and cowardice are not involved. If you are falling from a height it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope. If you have come up from deep water it is not coward- ly to fill your lungs with air. It is merely an instinct which cannot be destroyed. It is the same with the rats. For you, they are unendurable. They are a form of pressure that you cannot withstand, even if you wished to. You will do what is required of you.\'92 \
\'91But what is it, what is it? How can I do it if I don\'92t know what it is?\'92 \
O\'92Brien picked up the cage and brought it across to the nearer table. He set it down carefully on the baize cloth. Winston could hear the blood singing in his ears. He had the feeling of sitting in utter loneliness. He was in the middle \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
of a great empty plain, a flat desert drenched with sunlight, across which all sounds came to him out of immense dis- tances. Yet the cage with the rats was not two metres away from him. They were enormous rats. They were at the age when a rat\'92s muzzle grows blunt and fierce and his fur brown instead of grey. \
\'91The rat,\'92 said O\'92Brien, still addressing his invisible audi- ence, \'91although a rodent, is carnivorous. You are aware of that. You will have heard of the things that happen in the poor quarters of this town. In some streets a woman dare not leave her baby alone in the house, even for five minutes. \
The rats are certain to attack it. Within quite a small time they will strip it to the bones. They also attack sick or dy- ing people. They show astonishing intelligence in knowing when a human being is helpless.\'92 \
There was an outburst of squeals from the cage. It seemed to reach Winston from far away. The rats were fighting; they were trying to get at each other through the partition. He heard also a deep groan of despair. That, too, seemed to come from outside himself. \
O\'92Brien picked up the cage, and, as he did so, pressed something in it. There was a sharp click. Winston made a frantic effort to tear himself loose from the chair. It was hopeless; every part of him, even his head, was held im- movably. O\'92Brien moved the cage nearer. It was less than a metre from Winston\'92s face. \
\'91I have pressed the first lever,\'92 said O\'92Brien. \'91You under- stand the construction of this cage. The mask will fit over your head, leaving no exit. When I press this other lever, \
0 1984 \
the door of the cage will slide up. These starving brutes will shoot out of it like bullets. Have you ever seen a rat leap through the air? They will leap on to your face and bore straight into it. Sometimes they attack the eyes first. Some- times they burrow through the cheeks and devour the tongue.\'92 \
The cage was nearer; it was closing in. Winston heard a succession of shrill cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head. But he fought furiously against his panic. To think, to think, even with a split second left\'97to think was the only hope. Suddenly the foul musty odour of the brutes struck his nostrils. There was a violent convul- sion of nausea inside him, and he almost lost consciousness. Everything had gone black. For an instant he was insane, a screaming animal. Yet he came out of the blackness clutch- ing an idea. There was one and only one way to save himself. He must interpose another human being, the BODY of an- other human being, between himself and the rats. \
The circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision of anything else. The wire door was a couple of hand-spans from his face. The rats knew what was coming now. One of them was leaping up and down, the other, an old scaly grandfather of the sewers, stood up, with his pink hands against the bars, and fiercely sniffed the air. Winston could see the whiskers and the yellow teeth. Again the black panic took hold of him. He was blind, helpless, mindless. \
\'91It was a common punishment in Imperial China,\'92 said O\'92Brien as didactically as ever. \
The mask was closing on his face. The wire brushed his Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
cheek. And then\'97no, it was not relief, only hope, a tiny fragment of hope. Too late, perhaps too late. But he had suddenly understood that in the whole world there was just ONE person to whom he could transfer his punishment\'97 ONE body that he could thrust between himself and the rats. And he was shouting frantically, over and over. \
\'91Do it to Julia! Do it to Julia! Not me! Julia! I don\'92t care what you do to her. Tear her face off, strip her to the bones. Not me! Julia! Not me!\'92 \
He was falling backwards, into enormous depths, away from the rats. He was still strapped in the chair, but he had fallen through the floor, through the walls of the build- ing, through the earth, through the oceans, through the atmosphere, into outer space, into the gulfs between the stars\'97always away, away, away from the rats. He was light years distant, but O\'92Brien was still standing at his side. \
There was still the cold touch of wire against his cheek. But through the darkness that enveloped him he heard another metallic click, and knew that the cage door had clicked shut and not open. \
 1984 \
Chapter 6 \
\dn32 T\up0 he Chestnut Tree was almost empty. A ray of sunlight slanting through a window fell on dusty table-tops. It was the lonely hour of fifteen. A tinny music trickled from \
the telescreens.\uc0\u8232 Winston sat in his usual corner, gazing into an empty \
glass. Now and again he glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wall. BIG BROTHER IS WATCH- ING YOU, the caption said. Unbidden, a waiter came and filled his glass up with Victory Gin, shaking into it a few drops from another bottle with a quill through the cork. It was saccharine flavoured with cloves, the speciality of the cafe. \
Winston was listening to the telescreen. At present only music was coming out of it, but there was a possibility that at any moment there might be a special bulletin from the Ministry of Peace. The news from the African front was dis- quieting in the extreme. On and off he had been worrying about it all day. A Eurasian army (Oceania was at war with Eurasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia) was moving southward at terrifying speed. The mid-day bulle- tin had not mentioned any definite area, but it was probable that already the mouth of the Congo was a battlefield. Braz- zaville and Leopoldville were in danger. One did not have to look at the map to see what it meant. It was not merely \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
a question of losing Central Africa: for the first time in the whole war, the territory of Oceania itself was menaced. \
A violent emotion, not fear exactly but a sort of undif- ferentiated excitement, flared up in him, then faded again. He stopped thinking about the war. In these days he could never fix his mind on any one subject for more than a few moments at a time. He picked up his glass and drained it at a gulp. As always, the gin made him shudder and even retch slightly. The stuff was horrible. The cloves and sac- charine, themselves disgusting enough in their sickly way, could not disguise the flat oily smell; and what was worst of all was that the smell of gin, which dwelt with him night and day, was inextricably mixed up in his mind with the smell of those\'97\'97 \
He never named them, even in his thoughts, and so far as it was possible he never visualized them. They were something that he was half-aware of, hovering close to his face, a smell that clung to his nostrils. As the gin rose in him he belched through purple lips. He had grown fatter since they released him, and had regained his old colour\'97 indeed, more than regained it. His features had thickened, the skin on nose and cheekbones was coarsely red, even the bald scalp was too deep a pink. A waiter, again unbid- den, brought the chessboard and the current issue of \'91The Times\'92, with the page turned down at the chess problem. \
Then, seeing that Winston\'92s glass was empty, he brought the gin bottle and filled it. There was no need to give orders. They knew his habits. The chessboard was always waiting for him, his corner table was always reserved; even when \
4 1984 \
the place was full he had it to himself, since nobody cared to be seen sitting too close to him. He never even bothered to count his drinks. At irregular intervals they presented him with a dirty slip of paper which they said was the bill, but he had the impression that they always undercharged him. It would have made no difference if it had been the other way about. He had always plenty of money nowadays. He even had a job, a sinecure, more highly-paid than his old job had been. \
The music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over. Winston raised his head to listen. No bulletins from the front, however. It was merely a brief announcement from the Ministry of Plenty. In the preceding quarter, it ap- peared, the Tenth Three-Year Plan\'92s quota for bootlaces had been overfulfilled by 98 per cent. \
He examined the chess problem and set out the pieces. It was a tricky ending, involving a couple of knights. \'91White to play and mate in two moves.\'92 Winston looked up at the por- trait of Big Brother. White always mates, he thought with a sort of cloudy mysticism. Always, without exception, it is so arranged. In no chess problem since the beginning of the world has black ever won. Did it not symbolize the eternal, unvarying triumph of Good over Evil? The huge face gazed back at him, full of calm power. White always mates. \
The voice from the telescreen paused and added in a dif- ferent and much graver tone: \'91You are warned to stand by for an important announcement at fifteen-thirty. Fifteen- thirty! This is news of the highest importance. Take care not to miss it. Fifteen-thirty!\'92 The tinkling music struck up \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
again.\uc0\u8232 Winston\'92s heart stirred. That was the bulletin from the \
front; instinct told him that it was bad news that was com- ing. All day, with little spurts of excitement, the thought of a smashing defeat in Africa had been in and out of his mind. He seemed actually to see the Eurasian army swarm- ing across the never-broken frontier and pouring down into the tip of Africa like a column of ants. Why had it not been possible to outflank them in some way? The outline of the West African coast stood out vividly in his mind. He picked up the white knight and moved it across the board. THERE was the proper spot. Even while he saw the black horde racing southward he saw another force, mysteriously assembled, suddenly planted in their rear, cutting their co- munications by land and sea. He felt that by willing it he was bringing that other force into existence. But it was nec- essary to act quickly. If they could get control of the whole of Africa, if they had airfields and submarine bases at the Cape, it would cut Oceania in two. It might mean anything: defeat, breakdown, the redivision of the world, the destruc- tion of the Party! He drew a deep breath. An extraordinary medley of feeling\'97but it was not a medley, exactly; rather it was successive layers of feeling, in which one could not say which layer was undermost\'97struggled inside him. \
The spasm passed. He put the white knight back in its place, but for the moment he could not settle down to se- rious study of the chess problem. His thoughts wandered again. Almost unconsciously he traced with his finger in the dust on the table: \
 1984 \
2+2=5 \
\'91They can\'92t get inside you,\'92 she had said. But they could get inside you. \'91What happens to you here is FOR EVER,\'92 O\'92Brien had said. That was a true word. There were things, your own acts, from which you could never recover. Some- thing was killed in your breast: burnt out, cauterized out. \
He had seen her; he had even spoken to her. There was no danger in it. He knew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest in his doings. He could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of them had wanted to. Actually it was by chance that they had met. It was in the Park, on a vile, biting day in March, when the earth was like iron and all the grass seemed dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a few crocuses which had pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind. He was hurrying along with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her not ten metres away from him. It struck him at once that she had changed in some ill-defined way. \
They almost passed one another without a sign, then he turned and followed her, not very eagerly. He knew that there was no danger, nobody would take any interest in him. She did not speak. She walked obliquely away across the grass as though trying to get rid of him, then seemed to re- sign herself to having him at her side. Presently they were in among a clump of ragged leafless shrubs, useless either for concealment or as protection from the wind. They halted. It was vilely cold. The wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the occasional, dirty-looking crocuses. He put his \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
arm round her waist.\uc0\u8232 There was no telescreen, but there must be hidden \
microphones: besides, they could be seen. It did not mat- ter, nothing mattered. They could have lain down on the ground and done THAT if they had wanted to. His flesh froze with horror at the thought of it. She made no response whatever to the clasp of his arm; she did not even try to dis- engage herself. He knew now what had changed in her. Her face was sallower, and there was a long scar, partly hidden by the hair, across her forehead and temple; but that was not the change. It was that her waist had grown thicker, and, in a surprising way, had stiffened. He remembered how once, after the explosion of a rocket bomb, he had helped to drag a corpse out of some ruins, and had been astonished not only by the incredible weight of the thing, but by its rigidity and awkwardness to handle, which made it seem more like stone than flesh. Her body felt like that. It occurred to him that the texture of her skin would be quite different from what it had once been. \
He did not attempt to kiss her, nor did they speak. As they walked back across the grass, she looked directly at him for the first time. It was only a momentary glance, full of con- tempt and dislike. He wondered whether it was a dislike that came purely out of the past or whether it was inspired also by his bloated face and the water that the wind kept squeez- ing from his eyes. They sat down on two iron chairs, side by side but not too close together. He saw that she was about to speak. She moved her clumsy shoe a few centimetres and deliberately crushed a twig. Her feet seemed to have grown \
8 1984 \
broader, he noticed.\uc0\u8232 \'91I betrayed you,\'92 she said baldly. \'91I betrayed you,\'92 he said. \
She gave him another quick look of dislike.\uc0\u8232 \'91Sometimes,\'92 she said, \'91they threaten you with something something you can\'92t stand up to, can\'92t even think about. And then you say, \'91Don\'92t do it to me, do it to somebody \
else, do it to so-and-so.\'92 And perhaps you might pretend, afterwards, that it was only a trick and that you just said it to make them stop and didn\'92t really mean it. But that isn\'92t true. At the time when it happens you do mean it. You think there\'92s no other way of saving yourself, and you\'92re quite ready to save yourself that way. You WANT it to happen to the other person. You don\'92t give a damn what they suffer. \
All you care about is yourself.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91All you care about is yourself,\'92 he echoed.\u8232 \'91And after that, you don\'92t feel the same towards the other \
person any longer.\'92\uc0\u8232 \'91No,\'92 he said, \'91you don\'92t feel the same.\'92\u8232 There did not seem to be anything more to say. The wind \
plastered their thin overalls against their bodies. Almost at once it became embarrassing to sit there in silence: besides, it was too cold to keep still. She said something about catch- ing her Tube and stood up to go. \
\'91We must meet again,\'92 he said.\uc0\u8232 \'91Yes,\'92 she said, \'91we must meet again.\'92 \
He followed irresolutely for a little distance, half a pace behind her. They did not speak again. She did not actually try to shake him off, but walked at just such a speed as to \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
prevent his keeping abreast of her. He had made up his mind that he would accompany her as far as the Tube station, but suddenly this process of trailing along in the cold seemed pointless and unbearable. He was overwhelmed by a desire not so much to get away from Julia as to get back to the Chestnut Tree Cafe, which had never seemed so attractive as at this moment. He had a nostalgic vision of his corner table, with the newspaper and the chessboard and the ever- flowing gin. Above all, it would be warm in there. The next moment, not altogether by accident, he allowed himself to become separated from her by a small knot of people. He made a halfhearted attempt to catch up, then slowed down, turned, and made off in the opposite direction. When he had gone fifty metres he looked back. The street was not crowded, but already he could not distinguish her. Any one of a dozen hurrying figures might have been hers. Perhaps her thickened, stiffened body was no longer recognizable from behind. \
\'91At the time when it happens,\'92 she had said, \'91you do mean it.\'92 He had meant it. He had not merely said it, he had wished it. He had wished that she and not he should be delivered over to the\'97\'97 \
Something changed in the music that trickled from the telescreen. A cracked and jeering note, a yellow note, came into it. And then\'97perhaps it was not happening, perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblance of sound\'97a voice was singing: \
0 \
1984 \
\'91Under the spreading chestnut tree \
I sold you and you sold me\'97\'97\'92 \
The tears welled up in his eyes. A passing waiter noticed that his glass was empty and came back with the gin bottle. He took up his glass and sniffed at it. The stuff grew not less but more horrible with every mouthful he drank. But it had become the element he swam in. It was his life, his death, and his resurrection. It was gin that sank him into stupor every night, and gin that revived him every morning. When he woke, seldom before eleven hundred, with gummed-up eyelids and fiery mouth and a back that \
seemed to be broken, it would have been impossible even to rise from the horizontal if it had not been for the bottle and teacup placed beside the bed overnight. Through the midday hours he sat with glazed face, the bottle handy, lis- tening to the telescreen. From fifteen to closing-time he was a fixture in the Chestnut Tree. No one cared what he did any longer, no whistle woke him, no telescreen admon- ished him. Occasionally, perhaps twice a week, he went to a dusty, forgotten-looking office in the Ministry of Truth and did a little work, or what was called work. He had been ap- pointed to a sub-committee of a sub-committee which had sprouted from one of the innumerable committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in the compilation of the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary. They were engaged in producing something called an Interim Report, but what it was that they were reporting on he had never definitely found out. It was something to do with the ques- tion of whether commas should be placed inside brackets, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 1 \
or outside. There were four others on the committee, all of them persons similar to himself. There were days when they assembled and then promptly dispersed again, frankly ad- mitting to one another that there was not really anything to be done. But there were other days when they settled down to their work almost eagerly, making a tremendous show of entering up their minutes and drafting long memoranda which were never finished\'97when the argument as to what they were supposedly arguing about grew extraordinarily involved and abstruse, with subtle haggling over definitions, enormous digressions, quarrels\'97threats, even, to appeal to higher authority. And then suddenly the life would go out of them and they would sit round the table looking at one another with extinct eyes, like ghosts fading at cock-crow. \
The telescreen was silent for a moment. Winston raised his head again. The bulletin! But no, they were merely changing the music. He had the map of Africa behind his eyelids. The movement of the armies was a diagram: a black arrow tearing vertically southward, and a white arrow hori- zontally eastward, across the tail of the first. As though for reassurance he looked up at the imperturbable face in the portrait. Was it conceivable that the second arrow did not even exist? \
His interest flagged again. He drank another mouthful of gin, picked up the white knight and made a tentative move. Check. But it was evidently not the right move, because\'97\'97 \
Uncalled, a memory floated into his mind. He saw a candle-lit room with a vast white-counterpaned bed, and himself, a boy of nine or ten, sitting on the floor, shaking \
 1984 \
a dice-box, and laughing excitedly. His mother was sitting opposite him and also laughing. \
It must have been about a month before she disappeared. It was a moment of reconciliation, when the nagging hun- ger in his belly was forgotten and his earlier affection for her had temporarily revived. He remembered the day well, a pelting, drenching day when the water streamed down the window-pane and the light indoors was too dull to read by. The boredom of the two children in the dark, cramped bedroom became unbearable. Winston whined and griz- zled, made futile demands for food, fretted about the room pulling everything out of place and kicking the wainscot- ing until the neighbours banged on the wall, while the younger child wailed intermittently. In the end his mother said, \'91Now be good, and I\'92Il buy you a toy. A lovely toy\'97 you\'92ll love it\'92; and then she had gone out in the rain, to a little general shop which was still sporadically open nearby, and came back with a cardboard box containing an outfit of Snakes and Ladders. He could still remember the smell of the damp cardboard. It was a miserable outfit. The board was cracked and the tiny wooden dice were so ill-cut that they would hardly lie on their sides. Winston looked at the thing sulkily and without interest. But then his mother lit a piece of candle and they sat down on the floor to play. Soon he was wildly excited and shouting with laughter as the tid- dly-winks climbed hopefully up the ladders and then came slithering down the snakes again, almost to the starting- point. They played eight games, winning four each. His tiny sister, too young to understand what the game was about, \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
had sat propped up against a bolster, laughing because the others were laughing. For a whole afternoon they had all been happy together, as in his earlier childhood. \
He pushed the picture out of his mind. It was a false memory. He was troubled by false memories occasionally. They did not matter so long as one knew them for what they were. Some things had happened, others had not happened. \
He turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knight again. Almost in the same instant it dropped on to the board with a clatter. He had started as though a pin had run into him. \
A shrill trumpet-call had pierced the air. It was the bul- letin! Victory! It always meant victory when a trumpet-call preceded the news. A sort of electric drill ran through the cafe. Even the waiters had started and pricked up their ears. \
The trumpet-call had let loose an enormous volume of noise. Already an excited voice was gabbling from the tele- screen, but even as it started it was almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside. The news had run round the streets like magic. He could hear just enough of what was issuing from the telescreen to realize that it had all hap- pened, as he had foreseen; a vast seaborne armada had secretly assembled a sudden blow in the enemy\'92s rear, the white arrow tearing across the tail of the black. Fragments of triumphant phrases pushed themselves through the din: \
\'91Vast strategic manoeuvre\'97perfect co-ordination\'97utter rout\'97half a million prisoners\'97complete demoraliza- tion\'97control of the whole of Africa\'97bring the war within \
4 1984 \
measurable distance of its end\'97victory\'97greatest victory in human history\'97victory, victory, victory!\'92 \
Under the table Winston\'92s feet made convulsive move- ments. He had not stirred from his seat, but in his mind he was running, swiftly running, he was with the crowds outside, cheering himself deaf. He looked up again at the portrait of Big Brother. The colossus that bestrode the world! The rock against which the hordes of Asia dashed themselves in vain! He thought how ten minutes ago\'97yes, only ten minutes\'97there had still been equivocation in his heart as he wondered whether the news from the front would be of victory or defeat. Ah, it was more than a Eur- asian army that had perished! Much had changed in him since that first day in the Ministry of Love, but the final, in- dispensable, healing change had never happened, until this moment. \
The voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisoners and booty and slaughter, but the shouting outside had died down a little. The waiters were turning back to their work. One of them approached with the gin bottle. Winston, sitting in a blissful dream, paid no at- tention as his glass was filled up. He was not running or cheering any longer. He was back in the Ministry of Love, with everything forgiven, his soul white as snow. He was in the public dock, confessing everything, implicating every- body. He was walking down the white-tiled corridor, with the feeling of walking in sunlight, and an armed guard at his back. The long-hoped-for bullet was entering his brain. \
He gazed up at the enormous face. Forty years it had tak- Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
en him to learn what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache. O cruel, needless misunderstanding! O stubborn, self-willed exile from the loving breast! Two gin- scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose. But it was all right, everything was all right, the struggle was finished. He had won the victory over himself. He loved Big Brother. \
THE END\uc0\u8232 APPENDIX.\u8232 The Principles of Newspeak\u8232 Newspeak was the official language of Oceania and \
had been devised to meet the ideological needs of Ingsoc, or English Socialism. In the year 1984 there was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means of commu- nication, either in speech or writing. The leading articles in \'91The Times\'92 were written in it, but this was a TOUR DE FORCE which could only be carried out by a specialist. It was expected that Newspeak would have finally supersed- ed Oldspeak (or Standard English, as we should call it) by about the year 2050. Meanwhile it gained ground steadi- ly, all Party members tending to use Newspeak words and grammatical constructions more and more in their every- day speech. The version in use in 1984, and embodied in the Ninth and Tenth Editions of the Newspeak Dictionary, was a provisional one, and contained many superfluous words and archaic formations which were due to be suppressed later. It is with the final, perfected version, as embodied in the Eleventh Edition of the Dictionary, that we are con- cerned here. \
The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a  1984 \
medium of expression for the world-view and mental hab- its proper to the devotees of Ingsoc, but to make all other modes of thought impossible. It was intended that when Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten, a heretical thought\'97that is, a thought diverging from the principles of Ingsoc\'97should be literally unthink- able, at least so far as thought is dependent on words. Its vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact and of- ten very subtle expression to every meaning that a Party member could properly wish to express, while excluding all other meanings and also the possibility of arriving at them by indirect methods. This was done partly by the invention of new words, but chiefly by eliminating unde- sirable words and by stripping such words as remained of unorthodox meanings, and so far as possible of all second- ary meanings whatever. To give a single example. The word FREE still existed in Newspeak, but it could only be used in such statements as \'91This dog is free from lice\'92 or \'91This field is free from weeds\'92. It could not be used in its old sense of \'91politically free\'92 or \'91intellectually free\'92 since political and in- tellectual freedom no longer existed even as concepts, and were therefore of necessity nameless. Quite apart from the suppression of definitely heretical words, reduction of vo- cabulary was regarded as an end in itself, and no word that could be dispensed with was allowed to survive. Newspeak was designed not to extend but to DIMINISH the range of thought, and this purpose was indirectly assisted by cutting the choice of words down to a minimum. \
Newspeak was founded on the English language as we Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2  \
now know it, though many Newspeak sentences, even when not containing newly-created words, would be barely intel- ligible to an English-speaker of our own day. Newspeak words were divided into three distinct classes, known as the A vocabulary, the B vocabulary (also called compound words), and the C vocabulary. It will be simpler to discuss each class separately, but the grammatical peculiarities of the language can be dealt with in the section devoted to the \
A vocabulary, since the same rules held good for all three categories. \
THE A VOCABULARY. The A vocabulary consisted of the words needed for the business of everyday life\'97for such things as eating, drinking, working, putting on one\'92s clothes, going up and down stairs, riding in vehicles, garden- ing, cooking, and the like. It was composed almost entirely of words that we already possess words like HIT, RUN, DOG, TREE, SUGAR, HOUSE, FIELD\'97but in compari- son with the present-day English vocabulary their number was extremely small, while their meanings were far more rigidly defined. All ambiguities and shades of meaning had been purged out of them. So far as it could be achieved, a Newspeak word of this class was simply a staccato sound expressing ONE clearly understood concept. It would have been quite impossible to use the A vocabulary for literary purposes or for political or philosophical discussion. It was intended only to express simple, purposive thoughts, usu- ally involving concrete objects or physical actions. \
The grammar of Newspeak had two outstanding pe- culiarities. The first of these was an almost complete \
8 1984 \
interchangeability between different parts of speech. Any word in the language (in principle this applied even to very abstract words such as IF or WHEN) could be used either as verb, noun, adjective, or adverb. Between the verb and the noun form, when they were of the same root, there was never any variation, this rule of itself involving the de- struction of many archaic forms. The word THOUGHT, for example, did not exist in Newspeak. Its place was tak- en by THINK, which did duty for both noun and verb. No etymological principle was followed here: in some cases it was the original noun that was chosen for retention, in oth- er cases the verb. Even where a noun and verb of kindred meaning were not etymologically connected, one or other of them was frequently suppressed. There was, for example, no such word as CUT, its meaning being sufficiently cov- ered by the noun-verb KNIFE. Adjectives were formed by adding the suffix -FUL to the noun-verb, and adverbs by adding -WISE. Thus for example, SPEEDFUL meant \'91rapid\'92 and SPEEDWISE meant \'91quickly\'92. Certain of our present- day adjectives, such as GOOD, STRONG, BIG, BLACK, SOFT, were retained, but their total number was very small. There was little need for them, since almost any adjectival meaning could be arrived at by adding -FUL to a noun-verb. None of the now-existing adverbs was retained, except for a very few already ending in -WISE: the -WISE termination was invariable. The word WELL, for example, was replaced by GOODWISE. \
In addition, any word\'97this again applied in principle to every word in the language\'97could be negatived by add- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 9 \
ing the affix UN-, or could be strengthened by the affix PLUS-, or, for still greater emphasis, DOUBLEPLUS-. Thus, for example, UNCOLD meant \'91warm\'92, while PLUSCOLD and DOUBLEPLUSCOLD meant, respectively, \'91very cold\'92 and \'91superlatively cold\'92. It was also possible, as in present- day English, to modify the meaning of almost any word by prepositional affixes such as ANTE-, POST-, UP-, DOWN-, etc. By such methods it was found possible to bring about an enormous diminution of vocabulary. Given, for instance, the word GOOD, there was no need for such a word as BAD, since the required meaning was equally well\'97indeed, bet- ter\'97expressed by UNGOOD. All that was necessary, in any case where two words formed a natural pair of oppo- sites, was to decide which of them to suppress. DARK, for example, could be replaced by UNLIGHT, or LIGHT by UNDARK, according to preference. \
The second distinguishing mark of Newspeak gram- mar was its regularity. Subject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexions followed the same rules. \
Thus, in all verbs the preterite and the past participle were the same and ended in -ED. The preterite of STEAL was STEALED, the preterite of THINK was THINKED, and so on throughout the language, all such forms as SWAM, GAVE, BROUGHT, SPOKE, TAKEN, etc., being abolished. All plurals were made by adding -S or -ES as the case might be. The plurals OF MAN, OX, LIFE, were MANS, OXES, LIFES. Comparison of adjectives was invariably made by adding -ER, -EST (GOOD, GOODER, GOODEST), ir- regular forms and the MORE, MOST formation being \
80 1984 \
suppressed.\uc0\u8232 The only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect \
irregularly were the pronouns, the relatives, the demonstra- tive adjectives, and the auxiliary verbs. All of these followed their ancient usage, except that WHOM had been scrapped as unnecessary, and the SHALL, SHOULD tenses had been dropped, all their uses being covered by WILL and WOULD. There were also certain irregularities in word-formation arising out of the need for rapid and easy speech. A word which was difficult to utter, or was liable to be incorrectly heard, was held to be ipso facto a bad word; occasionally therefore, for the sake of euphony, extra letters were insert- ed into a word or an archaic formation was retained. But this need made itself felt chiefly in connexion with the B vocabulary. WHY so great an importance was attached to ease of pronunciation will be made clear later in this essay. \
THE B VOCABULARY. The B vocabulary consisted of words which had been deliberately constructed for political purposes: words, that is to say, which not only had in every case a political implication, but were intended to impose a desirable mental attitude upon the person using them. Without a full understanding of the principles of Ingsoc it was difficult to use these words correctly. In some cases they could be translated into Oldspeak, or even into words taken from the A vocabulary, but this usually demanded a long paraphrase and always involved the loss of certain overtones. The B words were a sort of verbal shorthand, of- ten packing whole ranges of ideas into a few syllables, and at the same time more accurate and forcible than ordinary \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 81 \
language.\uc0\u8232 The B words were in all cases compound words. [Com- \
pound words such as SPEAKWRITE, were of course to be found in the A vocabulary, but these were merely convenient abbreviations and had no special ideologcal colour.] They consisted of two or more words, or portions of words, weld- ed together in an easily pronounceable form. The resulting amalgam was always a noun-verb, and inflected according to the ordinary rules. To take a single example: the word GOODTHINK, meaning, very roughly, \'91orthodoxy\'92, or, if one chose to regard it as a verb, \'91to think in an orthodox manner\'92. This inflected as follows: noun-verb, GOOD- THINK; past tense and past participle, GOODTHINKED; present participle, GOOD-THINKING; adjective, GOOD- THINKFUL; adverb, GOODTHINKWISE; verbal noun, GOODTHINKER. \
The B words were not constructed on any etymological plan. The words of which they were made up could be any parts of speech, and could be placed in any order and muti- lated in any way which made them easy to pronounce while indicating their derivation. In the word CRIMETHINK (thoughtcrime), for instance, the THINK came second, whereas in THINKPOL (Thought Police) it came first, and in the latter word POLICE had lost its second syllable. Because of the great difficulty in securing euphony, irregu- lar formations were commoner in the B vocabulary than in the A vocabulary. For example, the adjective forms of MINITRUE, MINIPAX, and MINILUV were, respectively, MINITRUTHFUL, MINIPEACEFUL, and MINILOVELY, \
8 1984 \
simply because -TRUEFUL, -PAXFUL, and -LOVEFUL were slightly awkward to pronounce. In principle, however, all B words could inflect, and all inflected in exactly the same way. \
Some of the B words had highly subtilized meanings, barely intelligible to anyone who had not mastered the language as a whole. Consider, for example, such a typical sentence from a \'91Times\'92 leading article as OLDTHINKERS UNBELLYFEEL INGSOC. The shortest rendering that one could make of this in Oldspeak would be: \'91Those whose ideas were formed before the Revolution cannot have a full emotional understanding of the principles of English So- cialism.\'92 But this is not an adequate translation. To begin with, in order to grasp the full meaning of the Newspeak sentence quoted above, one would have to have a clear idea of what is meant by INGSOC. And in addition, only a per- son thoroughly grounded in Ingsoc could appreciate the full force of the word BELLYFEEL, which implied a blind, enthusiastic acceptance difficult to imagine today; or of the word OLDTHINK, which was inextricably mixed up with the idea of wickedness and decadence. But the special func- tion of certain Newspeak words, of which OLDTHINK was one, was not so much to express meanings as to de- stroy them. These words, necessarily few in number, had had their meanings extended until they contained within themselves whole batteries of words which, as they were sufficiently covered by a single comprehensive term, could now be scrapped and forgotten. The greatest difficulty fac- ing the compilers of the Newspeak Dictionary was not to \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
invent new words, but, having invented them, to make sure what they meant: to make sure, that is to say, what ranges of words they cancelled by their existence. \
As we have already seen in the case of the word FREE, words which had once borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake of convenience, but only with the undesirable meanings purged out of them. Count- less other words such as HONOUR, JUSTICE, MORALITY, INTERNATIONALISM, DEMOCRACY, SCIENCE, and RELIGION had simply ceased to exist. A few blanket words covered them, and, in covering them, abolished them. All words grouping themselves round the concepts of liber- ty and equality, for instance, were contained in the single word CRIMETHINK, while all words grouping themselves round the concepts of objectivity and rationalism were contained in the single word OLDTHINK. Greater preci- sion would have been dangerous. What was required in a Party member was an outlook similar to that of the ancient Hebrew who knew, without knowing much else, that all na- tions other than his own worshipped \'91false gods\'92. He did not need to know that these gods were called Baal, Osiris, Moloch, Ashtaroth, and the like: probably the less he knew about them the better for his orthodoxy. He knew Jehovah and the commandments of Jehovah: he knew, therefore, that all gods with other names or other attributes were false gods. In somewhat the same way, the party member knew what constituted right conduct, and in exceedingly vague, generalized terms he knew what kinds of departure from it were possible. His sexual life, for example, was entirely \
84 1984 \
regulated by the two Newspeak words SEXCRIME (sex- ual immorality) and GOODSEX (chastity). SEXCRIME covered all sexual misdeeds whatever. It covered fornica- tion, adultery, homosexuality, and other perversions, and, in addition, normal intercourse practised for its own sake. There was no need to enumerate them separately, since they were all equally culpable, and, in principle, all punishable by death. In the C vocabulary, which consisted of scientific and technical words, it might be necessary to give special- ized names to certain sexual aberrations, but the ordinary citizen had no need of them. He knew what was meant by GOODSEX\'97that is to say, normal intercourse between man and wife, for the sole purpose of begetting children, and without physical pleasure on the part of the woman: all else was SEXCRIME. In Newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a heretical thought further than the perception that it WAS heretical: beyond that point the necessary words were nonexistent. \
No word in the B vocabulary was ideologically neutral. A great many were euphemisms. Such words, for instance, as JOYCAMP (forced-labour camp) or MINIPAX Minis- \
try of Peace, i.e. Ministry of War) meant almost the exact opposite of what they appeared to mean. Some words, on the other hand, displayed a frank and contemptuous un- derstanding of the real nature of Oceanic society. An example was PROLEFEED, meaning the rubbishy enter- tainment and spurious news which the Party handed out to the masses. Other words, again, were ambivalent, hav- ing the connotation \'91good\'92 when applied to the Party and \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
\'91bad\'92 when applied to its enemies. But in addition there were great numbers of words which at first sight appeared to be mere abbreviations and which derived their ideological co- lour not from their meaning, but from their structure. \
So far as it could be contrived, everything that had or might have political significance of any kind was fitted into the B vocabulary. The name of every organization, or body of people, or doctrine, or country, or institution, or public building, was invariably cut down into the familiar shape; that is, a single easily pronounced word with the smallest number of syllables that would preserve the original deri- vation. In the Ministry of Truth, for example, the Records Department, in which Winston Smith worked, was called RECDEP, the Fiction Department was called FICDEP, the Teleprogrammes Department was called TELEDEP, and so on. This was not done solely with the object of saving time. Even in the early decades of the twentieth century, tele- scoped words and phrases had been one of the characteristic features of political language; and it had been noticed that the tendency to use abbreviations of this kind was most marked in totalitarian countries and totalitarian organi- zations. Examples were such words as NAZI, GESTAPO, COMINTERN, INPRECORR, AGITPROP. In the begin- ning the practice had been adopted as it were instinctively, but in Newspeak it was used with a conscious purpose. It was perceived that in thus abbreviating a name one nar- rowed and subtly altered its meaning, by cutting out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to it. The words COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL, for instance, call up \
8 1984 \
a composite picture of universal human brotherhood, red flags, barricades, Karl Marx, and the Paris Commune. The word COMINTERN, on the other hand, suggests merely a tightly-knit organization and a well-defined body of doc- trine. It refers to something almost as easily recognized, and as limited in purpose, as a chair or a table. COMIN- TERN is a word that can be uttered almost without taking thought, whereas COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL is a phrase over which one is obliged to linger at least mo- mentarily. In the same way, the associations called up by a word like MINITRUE are fewer and more controllable than those called up by MINISTRY OF TRUTH. This accounted not only for the habit of abbreviating whenever possible, but also for the almost exaggerated care that was taken to make every word easily pronounceable. \
In Newspeak, euphony outweighed every consideration other than exactitude of meaning. Regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when it seemed necessary. And rightly so, since what was required, above all for political purposes, was short clipped words of unmistakable mean- ing which could be uttered rapidly and which roused the minimum of echoes in the speaker\'92s mind. The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force from the fact that nearly all of them were very much alike. Almost invariably these words\'97GOODTHINK, MINIPAX, PROLEFEED, SEX- CRIME, JOYCAMP, INGSOC, BELLYFEEL, THINKPOL, and countless others\'97were words of two or three syllables, with the stress distributed equally between the first syllable and the last. The use of them encouraged a gabbling style of \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 8 \
speech, at once staccato and monotonous. And this was ex- actly what was aimed at. The intention was to make speech, and especially speech on any subject not ideologically neu- tral, as nearly as possible independent of consciousness. For the purposes of everyday life it was no doubt necessary, or sometimes necessary, to reflect before speaking, but a Party member called upon to make a political or ethical judge- ment should be able to spray forth the correct opinions as automatically as a machine gun spraying forth bullets. His training fitted him to do this, the language gave him an al- most foolproof instrument, and the texture of the words, with their harsh sound and a certain wilful ugliness which was in accord with the spirit of Ingsoc, assisted the process still further. \
So did the fact of having very few words to choose from. Relative to our own, the Newspeak vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it were constantly being devised. Newspeak, indeed, differed from most all other languages in that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger every year. Each reduction was a gain, since the smaller the area of choice, the smaller the temptation to take thought. Ulti- mately it was hoped to make articulate speech issue from the larynx without involving the higher brain centres at all. This aim was frankly admitted in the Newspeak word DUCKSPEAK, meaning \'91to quack like a duck\'92. Like various other words in the B vocabulary, DUCKSPEAK was ambiv- alent in meaning. Provided that the opinions which were quacked out were orthodox ones, it implied nothing but praise, and when \'91The Times\'92 referred to one of the orators \
88 1984 \
of the Party as a DOUBLEPLUSGOOD DUCKSPEAKER it was paying a warm and valued compliment. \
THE C VOCABULARY. The C vocabulary was supple- mentary to the others and consisted entirely of scientific and technical terms. These resembled the scientific terms in use today, and were constructed from the same roots, but the usual care was taken to define them rigidly and strip them of undesirable meanings. They followed the same grammatical rules as the words in the other two vocabu- laries. Very few of the C words had any currency either in everyday speech or in political speech. Any scientific work- er or technician could find all the words he needed in the list devoted to his own speciality, but he seldom had more than a smattering of the words occurring in the other lists. Only a very few words were common to all lists, and there was no vocabulary expressing the function of Science as a habit of mind, or a method of thought, irrespective of its particular branches. There was, indeed, no word for \'91Sci- ence\'92, any meaning that it could possibly bear being already sufficiently covered by the word INGSOC. \
From the foregoing account it will be seen that in New- speak the expression of unorthodox opinions, above a very low level, was well-nigh impossible. It was of course pos- sible to utter heresies of a very crude kind, a species of blasphemy. It would have been possible, for example, to say BIG BROTHER IS UNGOOD. But this statement, which to an orthodox ear merely conveyed a self-evident absur- dity, could not have been sustained by reasoned argument, because the necessary words were not available. Ideas inim- \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 89 \
ical to Ingsoc could only be entertained in a vague wordless form, and could only be named in very broad terms which lumped together and condemned whole groups of heresies without defining them in doing so. One could, in fact, only use Newspeak for unorthodox purposes by illegitimately translating some of the words back into Oldspeak. For ex- ample, ALL MANS ARE EQUAL was a possible Newspeak sentence, but only in the same sense in which ALL MEN ARE REDHAIRED is a possible Oldspeak sentence. It did not contain a grammatical error, but it expressed a palpa- ble untruth\'97i.e. that all men are of equal size, weight, or strength. The concept of political equality no longer existed, and this secondary meaning had accordingly been purged out of the word EQUAL. In 1984, when Oldspeak was still the normal means of communication, the danger theo- retically existed that in using Newspeak words one might remember their original meanings. In practice it was not difficult for any person well grounded in DOUBLETHINK to avoid doing this, but within a couple of generations even the possibility of such a lapse would have vaished. A per- son growing up with Newspeak as his sole language would no more know that EQUAL had once had the second- ary meaning of \'91politically equal\'92, or that FREE had once meant \'91intellectually free\'92, than for instance, a person who had never heard of chess would be aware of the secondary meanings attaching to QUEEN and ROOK. There would be many crimes and errors which it would be beyond his power to commit, simply because they were nameless and therefore unimaginable. And it was to be foreseen that with \
90 1984 \
the passage of time the distinguishing characteristics of Newspeak would become more and more pronounced\'97its words growing fewer and fewer, their meanings more and more rigid, and the chance of putting them to improper uses always diminishing. \
When Oldspeak had been once and for all superseded, the last link with the past would have been severed. History had already been rewritten, but fragments of the literature of the past survived here and there, imperfectly censored, and so long as one retained one\'92s knowledge of Oldspeak it was possible to read them. In the future such fragments, even if they chanced to survive, would be unintelligible and untranslatable. It was impossible to translate any pas- sage of Oldspeak into Newspeak unless it either referred to some technical process or some very simple everyday ac- tion, or was already orthodox (GOODTHINKFUL would be the Newspeak expression) in tendency. In practice this meant that no book written before approximately 1960 could be translated as a whole. Pre-revolutionary literature could only be subjected to ideological translation\'97that is, alteration in sense as well as language. Take for example the well-known passage from the Declaration of Indepen- dence: \
WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS TO BE SELF-EVIDENT, THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL, THAT THEY ARE ENDOWED BY THEIR CREATOR WITH CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTS, THAT AMONG THESE ARE LIFE, LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. \
Free eBooks at \cf4 Planet eBook.com \cf2 91 \
THAT TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS, GOVERNMENTS ARE INSTITUTED AMONG MEN, DERIVING THEIR POWERS FROM THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED. THAT WHENEVER ANY FORM OF GOVERNMENT BECOMES DESTRUCTIVE OF THOSE ENDS, IT IS THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE TO ALTER OR ABOLISH IT, AND TO INSTITUTE NEW GOVERNMENT... \
It would have been quite impossible to render this into Newspeak while keeping to the sense of the original. The nearest one could come to doing so would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word CRIMETHINK. A full translation could only be an ideological translation, where- by Jefferson\'92s words would be changed into a panegyric on absolute government. \
A good deal of the literature of the past was, indeed, al- ready being transformed in this way. Considerations of prestige made it desirable to preserve the memory of cer- tain historical figures, while at the same time bringing their achievements into line with the philosophy of Ingsoc. \
Various writers, such as Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, By- ron, Dickens, and some others were therefore in process of translation: when the task had been completed, their orig- inal writings, with all else that survived of the literature of the past, would be destroyed. These translations were a slow and difficult business, and it was not expected that they would be finished before the first or second decade of the twenty-first century. There were also large quantities of merely utilitarian literature\'97indispensable technical man- \
9 1984 \
uals, and the like\'97that had to be treated in the same way. It was chiefly in order to allow time for the preliminary work of translation that the final adoption of Newspeak had been fixed for so late a date as 2050. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Mr. Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, but was too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of light from his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard, kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beer from the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, where Mrs. Jones was already snoring.\
As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and a fluttering all through the farm buildings. Word had gone round during the day that old Major, the prize Middle White boar, had had a strange dream on the previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals. It had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon as Mr. Jones was safely out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called, though the name under which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty) was so highly regarded on the farm that everyone was quite ready to lose an hour's sleep in order to hear what he had to say.\
At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major was already ensconced on his bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from a beam. He was twelve years old and had lately grown rather stout, but he was still a majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent appearance in spite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. Before long the other animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after their different fashions. First came the three dogs, Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the straw immediately in front of the platform. The hens perched themselves on the window-sills, the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay down behind the pigs and began to chew the cud. The two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover, came in together, walking very slowly and setting down their vast hairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some small animal concealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare approaching middle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal. Boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong as any two ordinary horses put together. A white stripe down his nose gave him a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate intelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness of character and tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel, the white goat, and Benjamin, the donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animal on the farm, and the worst tempered. He seldom talked, and when he did, it was usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say that God had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would sooner have had no tail and no flies. Alone among the animals on the farm he never laughed. If asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at. Nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to Boxer; the two of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small paddock beyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.\
The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which had lost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering from side to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. Clover made a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklings nestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. At the last moment Mollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones's trap, came mincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. She took a place near the front and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to the red ribbons it was plaited with. Last of all came the cat, who looked round, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself in between Boxer and Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major's speech without listening to a word of what he was saying.\
All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slept on a perch behind the back door. When Major saw that they had all made themselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throat and began:\
"Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had last night. But I will come to the dream later. I have something else to say first. I do not think, comrades, that I shall be with you for many months longer, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdom as I have acquired. I have had a long life, I have had much time for thought as I lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that I understand the nature of life on this earth as well as any animal now living. It is about this that I wish to speak to you.\
"Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it: our lives are miserable, laborious, and short. We are born, we are given just so much food as will keep the breath in our bodies, and those of us who are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our strength; and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we are slaughtered with hideous cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaning of happiness or leisure after he is a year old. No animal in England is free. The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is the plain truth.\
"But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this land of ours is so poor that it cannot afford a decent life to those who dwell upon it? No, comrades, a thousand times no! The soil of England is fertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundance to an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it. This single farm of ours would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds of sheep--and all of them living in a comfort and a dignity that are now almost beyond our imagining. Why then do we continue in this miserable condition? Because nearly the whole of the produce of our labour is stolen from us by human beings. There, comrades, is the answer to all our problems. It is summed up in a single word--Man. Man is the only real enemy we have. Remove Man from the scene, and the root cause of hunger and overwork is abolished for ever.\
"Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does not give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all the animals. He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum that will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Our labour tills the soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one of us that owns more than his bare skin. You cows that I see before me, how many thousands of gallons of milk have you given during this last year? And what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding up sturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies. And you hens, how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how many of those eggs ever hatched into chickens? The rest have all gone to market to bring in money for Jones and his men. And you, Clover, where are those four foals you bore, who should have been the support and pleasure of your old age? Each was sold at a year old--you will never see one of them again. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in the fields, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall?\
"And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach their natural span. For myself I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones. I am twelve years old and have had over four hundred children. Such is the natural life of a pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end. You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you will scream your lives out at the block within a year. To that horror we all must come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. Even the horses and the dogs have no better fate. You, Boxer, the very day that those great muscles of yours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cut your throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. As for the dogs, when they grow old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks and drowns them in the nearest pond.\
"Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this life of ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, and the produce of our labour would be our own. Almost overnight we could become rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work night and day, body and soul, for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to you, comrades: Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it might be in a week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see this straw beneath my feet, that sooner or later justice will be done. Fix your eyes on that, comrades, throughout the short remainder of your lives! And above all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after you, so that future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.\
"And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argument must lead you astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and the animals have a common interest, that the prosperity of the one is the prosperity of the others. It is all lies. Man serves the interests of no creature except himself. And among us animals let there be perfect unity, perfect comradeship in the struggle. All men are enemies. All animals are comrades."\
At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speaking four large rats had crept out of their holes and were sitting on their hindquarters, listening to him. The dogs had suddenly caught sight of them, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats saved their lives. Major raised his trotter for silence.\
"Comrades," he said, "here is a point that must be settled. The wild creatures, such as rats and rabbits--are they our friends or our enemies? Let us put it to the vote. I propose this question to the meeting: Are rats comrades?"\
The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majority that rats were comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogs and the cat, who was afterwards discovered to have voted on both sides. Major continued:\
"I have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty of enmity towards Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. And remember also that in fighting against Man, we must not come to resemble him. Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No animal must ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drink alcohol, or smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All the habits of Man are evil. And, above all, no animal must ever tyrannise over his own kind. Weak or strong, clever or simple, we are all brothers. No animal must ever kill any other animal. All animals are equal.\
"And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannot describe that dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be when Man has vanished. But it reminded me of something that I had long forgotten. Many years ago, when I was a little pig, my mother and the other sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune and the first three words. I had known that tune in my infancy, but it had long since passed out of my mind. Last night, however, it came back to me in my dream. And what is more, the words of the song also came back-words, I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago and have been lost to memory for generations. I will sing you that song now, comrades. I am old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, you can sing it better for yourselves. It is called 'Beasts of England'."\
Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voice was hoarse, but he sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, something between 'Clementine' and 'La Cucaracha'. The words ran:\
Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,\
Beasts of every land and clime,\
Hearken to my joyful tidings\
Of the golden future time.\
\
Soon or late the day is coming,\
Tyrant Man shall be o'erthrown,\
And the fruitful fields of England\
Shall be trod by beasts alone.\
\
Rings shall vanish from our noses,\
And the harness from our back,\
Bit and spur shall rust forever,\
Cruel whips no more shall crack.\
\
Riches more than mind can picture,\
Wheat and barley, oats and hay,\
Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzels\
Shall be ours upon that day.\
\
Bright will shine the fields of England,\
Purer shall its waters be,\
Sweeter yet shall blow its breezes\
On the day that sets us free.\
\
For that day we all must labour,\
Though we die before it break;\
Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,\
All must toil for freedom's sake.\
\
Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,\
Beasts of every land and clime,\
Hearken well and spread my tidings\
Of the golden future time.\
\
The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement. Almost before Major had reached the end, they had begun singing it for themselves. Even the stupidest of them had already picked up the tune and a few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs and dogs, they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after a few preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into 'Beasts of England' in tremendous unison. The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheep bleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. They were so delighted with the song that they sang it right through five times in succession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had not been interrupted.\
Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr. Jones, who sprang out of bed, making sure that there was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which always stood in a corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shot into the darkness. The pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barn and the meeting broke up hurriedly. Everyone fled to his own sleeping-place. The birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settled down in the straw, and the whole farm was asleep in a moment.\
\cf5 Chapter II\
\cf0 Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body was buried at the foot of the orchard.\
This was early in March. During the next three months there was much secret activity. Major's speech had given to the more intelligent animals on the farm a completely new outlook on life. They did not know when the Rebellion predicted by Major would take place, they had no reason for thinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearly that it was their duty to prepare for it. The work of teaching and organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generally recognised as being the cleverest of the animals. Pre-eminent among the pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon, whom Mr. Jones was breeding up for sale. Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-looking Berkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, but with a reputation for getting his own way. Snowball was a more vivacious pig than Napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was not considered to have the same depth of character. All the other male pigs on the farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig named Squealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and a shrill voice. He was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing some difficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whisking his tail which was somehow very persuasive. The others said of Squealer that he could turn black into white.\
These three had elaborated old Major's teachings into a complete system of thought, to which they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week, after Mr. Jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn and expounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At the beginning they met with much stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the duty of loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as "Master," or made elementary remarks such as "Mr. Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we should starve to death." Others asked such questions as "Why should we care what happens after we are dead?" or "If this Rebellion is to happen anyway, what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigs had great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to the spirit of Animalism. The stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie, the white mare. The very first question she asked Snowball was: "Will there still be sugar after the Rebellion?"\
"No," said Snowball firmly. "We have no means of making sugar on this farm. Besides, you do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hay you want."\
"And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked Mollie.\
"Comrade," said Snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to are the badge of slavery. Can you not understand that liberty is worth more than ribbons?"\
Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.\
The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about by Moses, the tame raven. Moses, who was Mr. Jones's especial pet, was a spy and a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. He claimed to know of the existence of a mysterious country called Sugarcandy Mountain, to which all animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere up in the sky, a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain it was Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, and lump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Moses because he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed in Sugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade them that there was no such place.\
Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover. These two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves, but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbed everything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals by simple arguments. They were unfailing in their attendance at the secret meetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'Beasts of England', with which the meetings always ended.\
Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and more easily than anyone had expected. In past years Mr. Jones, although a hard master, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days. He had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and had taken to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time he would lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers, drinking, and occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked in beer. His men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, the buildings wanted roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals were underfed.\
June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer's Eve, which was a Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk at the Red Lion that he did not come back till midday on Sunday. The men had milked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting, without bothering to feed the animals. When Mr. Jones got back he immediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of the World over his face, so that when evening came, the animals were still unfed. At last they could stand it no longer. One of the cows broke in the door of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals began to help themselves from the bins. It was just then that Mr. Jones woke up. The next moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in their hands, lashing out in all directions. This was more than the hungry animals could bear. With one accord, though nothing of the kind had been planned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their tormentors. Jones and his men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all sides. The situation was quite out of their control. They had never seen animals behave like this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom they were used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened them almost out of their wits. After only a moment or two they gave up trying to defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all five of them were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road, with the animals pursuing them in triumph.\
Mrs. Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening, hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out of the farm by another way. Moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her, croaking loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones and his men out on to the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almost before they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfully carried through: Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.\
For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their good fortune. Their first act was to gallop in a body right round the boundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human being was hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings to wipe out the last traces of Jones's hated reign. The harness-room at the end of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, the dog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr. Jones had been used to castrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. The reins, the halters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to the rubbish fire which was burning in the yard. So were the whips. All the animals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames. Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses' manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.\
"Ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the mark of a human being. All animals should go naked."\
When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore in summer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire with the rest.\
In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that reminded them of Mr. Jones. Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed and served out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits for each dog. Then they sang 'Beasts of England' from end to end seven times running, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as they had never slept before.\
But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the glorious thing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. A little way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view of most of the farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and gazed round them in the clear morning light. Yes, it was theirs--everything that they could see was theirs! In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round and round, they hurled themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement. They rolled in the dew, they cropped mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass, they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its rich scent. Then they made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed with speechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool, the spinney. It was as though they had never seen these things before, and even now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.\
Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outside the door of the farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightened to go inside. After a moment, however, Snowball and Napoleon butted the door open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file, walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They tiptoed from room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kind of awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feather mattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet, the lithograph of Queen Victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. They were just coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be missing. Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the best bedroom. She had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones's dressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiring herself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others reproached her sharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the kitchen were taken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove in with a kick from Boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched. A unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should be preserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal must ever live there.\
The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon called them together again.\
"Comrades," said Snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long day before us. Today we begin the hay harvest. But there is another matter that must be attended to first."\
The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taught themselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belonged to Mr. Jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap. Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down to the five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for it was Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the two knuckles of his trotter, painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of the gate and in its place painted ANIMAL FARM. This was to be the name of the farm from now onwards. After this they went back to the farm buildings, where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be set against the end wall of the big barn. They explained that by their studies of the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principles of Animalism to Seven Commandments. These Seven Commandments would now be inscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all the animals on Animal Farm must live for ever after. With some difficulty (for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) Snowball climbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holding the paint-pot. The Commandments were written on the tarred wall in great white letters that could be read thirty yards away. They ran thus:\
THE SEVEN COMMANDMENTS\
\
1. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.\
2. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend.\
3. No animal shall wear clothes.\
4. No animal shall sleep in a bed.\
5. No animal shall drink alcohol.\
6. No animal shall kill any other animal.\
7. All animals are equal.\
It was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind" and one of the "S's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct all the way through. Snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. All the animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at once began to learn the Commandments by heart.\
"Now, comrades," cried Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to the hayfield! Let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest more quickly than Jones and his men could do."\
But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some time past, set up a loud lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-four hours, and their udders were almost bursting. After a little thought, the pigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, their trotters being well adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets of frothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerable interest.\
"What is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.\
"Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.\
"Never mind the milk, comrades!" cried Napoleon, placing himself in front of the buckets. "That will be attended to. The harvest is more important. Comrade Snowball will lead the way. I shall follow in a few minutes. Forward, comrades! The hay is waiting."\
So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and when they came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.\
\cf5 Chapter III\
\cf0 How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.\
Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for human beings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal was able to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. But the pigs were so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. As for the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understood the business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men had ever done. The pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised the others. With their superior knowledge it was natural that they should assume the leadership. Boxer and Clover would harness themselves to the cutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, of course) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walking behind and calling out "Gee up, comrade!" or "Whoa back, comrade!" as the case might be. And every animal down to the humblest worked at turning the hay and gathering it. Even the ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day in the sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. In the end they finished the harvest in two days' less time than it had usually taken Jones and his men. Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm had ever seen. There was no wastage whatever; the hens and ducks with their sharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And not an animal on the farm had stolen so much as a mouthful.\
All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The animals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be. Every mouthful of food was an acute positive pleasure, now that it was truly their own food, produced by themselves and for themselves, not doled out to them by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beings gone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too, inexperienced though the animals were. They met with many difficulties--for instance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had to tread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with their breath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs with their cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled them through. Boxer was the admiration of everybody. He had been a hard worker even in Jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one; there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on his mighty shoulders. From morning to night he was pushing and pulling, always at the spot where the work was hardest. He had made an arrangement with one of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier than anyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour at whatever seemed to be most needed, before the regular day's work began. His answer to every problem, every setback, was "I will work harder!"--which he had adopted as his personal motto.\
But everyone worked according to his capacity The hens and ducks, for instance, saved five bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up the stray grains. Nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, the quarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal features of life in the old days had almost disappeared. Nobody shirked--or almost nobody. Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had a way of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in her hoof. And the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. It was soon noticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found. She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or in the evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. But she always made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that it was impossible not to believe in her good intentions. Old Benjamin, the donkey, seemed quite unchanged since the Rebellion. He did his work in the same slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones's time, never shirking and never volunteering for extra work either. About the Rebellion and its results he would express no opinion. When asked whether he was not happier now that Jones was gone, he would say only "Donkeys live a long time. None of you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content with this cryptic answer.\
On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, and after breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week without fail. First came the hoisting of the flag. Snowball had found in the harness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones's and had painted on it a hoof and a horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhouse garden every Sunday morning. The flag was green, Snowball explained, to represent the green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signified the future Republic of the Animals which would arise when the human race had been finally overthrown. After the hoisting of the flag all the animals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was known as the Meeting. Here the work of the coming week was planned out and resolutions were put forward and debated. It was always the pigs who put forward the resolutions. The other animals understood how to vote, but could never think of any resolutions of their own. Snowball and Napoleon were by far the most active in the debates. But it was noticed that these two were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, the other could be counted on to oppose it. Even when it was resolved--a thing no one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behind the orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was a stormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. The Meeting always ended with the singing of 'Beasts of England', and the afternoon was given up to recreation.\
The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves. Here, in the evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and other necessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse. Snowball also busied himself with organising the other animals into what he called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He formed the Egg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for the cows, the Wild Comrades' Re-education Committee (the object of this was to tame the rats and rabbits), the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, and various others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. On the whole, these projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wild creatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately. They continued to behave very much as before, and when treated with generosity, simply took advantage of it. The cat joined the Re-education Committee and was very active in it for some days. She was seen one day sitting on a roof and talking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach. She was telling them that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chose could come and perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.\
The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By the autumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.\
As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogs learned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anything except the Seven Commandments. Muriel, the goat, could read somewhat better than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in the evenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap. Benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty. So far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. Clover learnt the whole alphabet, but could not put words together. Boxer could not get beyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust with his great hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his ears back, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might to remember what came next and never succeeding. On several occasions, indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew them, it was always discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decided to be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out once or twice every day to refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any but the six letters which spelt her own name. She would form these very neatly out of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or two and walk round them admiring them.\
None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A. It was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, and ducks, were unable to learn the Seven Commandments by heart. After much thought Snowball declared that the Seven Commandments could in effect be reduced to a single maxim, namely: "Four legs good, two legs bad." This, he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever had thoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds at first objected, since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, but Snowball proved to them that this was not so.\
"A bird's wing, comrades," he said, "is an organ of propulsion and not of manipulation. It should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishing mark of man is the HAND, the instrument with which he does all his mischief."\
The birds did not understand Snowball's long words, but they accepted his explanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the new maxim by heart. FOUR LEGS GOOD, TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the end wall of the barn, above the Seven Commandments and in bigger letters When they had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for this maxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep it up for hours on end, never growing tired of it.\
Napoleon took no interest in Snowball's committees. He said that the education of the young was more important than anything that could be done for those who were already grown up. It happened that Jessie and Bluebell had both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them to nine sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them away from their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible for their education. He took them up into a loft which could only be reached by a ladder from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusion that the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.\
The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixed every day into the pigs' mash. The early apples were now ripening, and the grass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. The animals had assumed as a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day, however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collected and brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some of the other animals murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in full agreement on this point, even Snowball and Napoleon. Squealer was sent to make the necessary explanations to the others.\
"Comrades!" he cried. "You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike milk and apples. I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking these things is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved by Science, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to the well-being of a pig. We pigs are brainworkers. The whole management and organisation of this farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching over your welfare. It is for YOUR sake that we drink that milk and eat those apples. Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? Jones would come back! Yes, Jones would come back! Surely, comrades," cried Squealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking his tail, "surely there is no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?"\
Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, it was that they did not want Jones back. When it was put to them in this light, they had no more to say. The importance of keeping the pigs in good health was all too obvious. So it was agreed without further argument that the milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples when they ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.\
\cf5 Chapter IV\
\cf0 By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread across half the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach them the tune of 'Beasts of England'.\
Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the Red Lion at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by a pack of good-for-nothing animals. The other farmers sympathised in principle, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each of them was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones's misfortune to his own advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the two farms which adjoined Animal Farm were on permanently bad terms. One of them, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm, much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedges in a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going gentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting according to the season. The other farm, which was called Pinchfield, was smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr. Frederick, a tough, shrewd man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hard bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.\
Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on Animal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning too much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of animals managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in a fortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm (they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the name "Animal Farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and were also rapidly starving to death. When time passed and the animals had evidently not starved to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed their tune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished on Animal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism, tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in common. This was what came of rebelling against the laws of Nature, Frederick and Pilkington said.\
However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed their own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms, and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through the countryside. Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage, sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pail over, hunters refused their fences and shot their riders on to the other side. Above all, the tune and even the words of 'Beasts of England' were known everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The human beings could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they pretended to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, they said, how even animals could bring themselves to sing such contemptible rubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given a flogging on the spot. And yet the song was irrepressible. The blackbirds whistled it in the hedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of the smithies and the tune of the church bells. And when the human beings listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of their future doom.\
Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones and all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, had entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to the farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching ahead with a gun in his hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the recapture of the farm.\
This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball, who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar's campaigns which he had found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gave his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his post.\
As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his first attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs. However, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create a little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks. Snowball now launched his second line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around and lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with their sticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly, at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.\
The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemies in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what Snowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, the three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them off. Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed straight for Jones. Jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. The pellets scored bloody streaks along Snowball's back, and a sheep dropped dead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen stone against Jones's legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun flew out of his hands. But the most terrifying spectacle of all was Boxer, rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shod hoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad from Foxwood on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, several men dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and the next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the yard. They were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not an animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his own fashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shoulders and sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment when the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the yard and make a bolt for the main road. And so within five minutes of their invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same way as they had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their calves all the way.\
All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing with his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn him over. The boy did not stir.\
"He is dead," said Boxer sorrowfully. "I had no intention of doing that. I forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do this on purpose?"\
"No sentimentality, comrade!" cried Snowball from whose wounds the blood was still dripping. "War is war. The only good human being is a dead one."\
"I have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated Boxer, and his eyes were full of tears.\
"Where is Mollie?" exclaimed somebody.\
Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her off with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with her head buried among the hay in the manger. She had taken to flight as soon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking for her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, had already recovered and made off.\
The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recounting his own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptu celebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and 'Beasts of England' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her grave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the need for all animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.\
The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "Animal Hero, First Class," which was conferred there and then on Snowball and Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on Sundays and holidays. There was also "Animal Hero, Second Class," which was conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.\
There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the end, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the ambush had been sprung. Mr. Jones's gun had been found lying in the mud, and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse. It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like a piece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on October the twelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the Cowshed, and once on Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.\
\cf5 Chapter V\
\cf0 As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late for work every morning and excused herself by saying that she had overslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite was excellent. On every kind of pretext she would run away from work and go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own reflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something more serious. One day, as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting her long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay, Clover took her aside.\
"Mollie," she said, "I have something very serious to say to you. This morning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from Foxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington's men was standing on the other side of the hedge. And--I was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this--he was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. What does that mean, Mollie?"\
"He didn't! I wasn't! It isn't true!" cried Mollie, beginning to prance about and paw the ground.\
"Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that that man was not stroking your nose?"\
"It isn't true!" repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the face, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the field.\
A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went to Mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under the straw was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon of different colours.\
Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the other side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart painted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fat red-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican, was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to be enjoying herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals ever mentioned Mollie again.\
In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and nothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the coming season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were manifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of farm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote. This arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the disputes between Snowball and Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point where disagreement was possible. If one of them suggested sowing a bigger acreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything except roots. Each had his own following, and there were some violent debates. At the Meetings Snowball often won over the majority by his brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support for himself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Of late the sheep had taken to bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad" both in and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. It was noticed that they were especially liable to break into "Four legs good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in Snowball's speeches. Snowball had made a close study of some back numbers of the 'Farmer and Stockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans for innovations and improvements. He talked learnedly about field drains, silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot every day, to save the labour of cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes of his own, but said quietly that Snowball's would come to nothing, and seemed to be biding his time. But of all their controversies, none was so bitter as the one that took place over the windmill.\
In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small knoll which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground, Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power. This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking machine. The animals had never heard of anything of this kind before (for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured up pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with reading and conversation.\
Within a few weeks Snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked out. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which had belonged to Mr. Jones--'One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House', 'Every Man His Own Bricklayer', and 'Electricity for Beginners'. Snowball used as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had a smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there for hours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers of excitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals found completely unintelligible but very impressive. All of them came to look at Snowball's drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and ducks came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. Only Napoleon held aloof. He had declared himself against the windmill from the start. One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walked heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg, urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.\
The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowball did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone would have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (How these were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that it could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days a week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on the windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves into two factions under the slogan, "Vote for Snowball and the three-day week" and "Vote for Napoleon and the full manger." Benjamin was the only animal who did not side with either faction. He refused to believe either that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save work. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always gone on--that is, badly.\
Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the defence of the farm. It was fully realised that though the human beings had been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another and more determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate Mr. Jones. They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring farms more restive than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in disagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to procure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. According to Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves. The animals listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, and could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.\
At last the day came when Snowball's plans were completed. At the Meeting on the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on the windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled in the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the building of the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it, and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowball sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a moment Snowball's eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences he painted a picture of Animal Farm as it might be when sordid labour was lifted from the animals' backs. His imagination had now run far beyond chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate threshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders, besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold water, and an electric heater. By the time he had finished speaking, there was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at this moment Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball, uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter before.\
At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogs wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed straight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to escape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and they were after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals crowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across the long pasture that led to the road. He was running as only a pig can run, but the dogs were close on his heels. Suddenly he slipped and it seemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again, running faster than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all but closed his jaws on Snowball's tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in time. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare, slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.\
Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a moment the dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers and reared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as fierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been used to do to Mr. Jones.\
Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised portion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver his speech. He announced that from now on the Sunday-morning Meetings would come to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In future all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. The animals would still assemble on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing 'Beasts of England', and receive their orders for the week; but there would be no more debates.\
In spite of the shock that Snowball's expulsion had given them, the animals were dismayed by this announcement. Several of them would have protested if they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer was vaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times, and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not think of anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more articulate. Four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking at once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out deep, menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then the sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legs bad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to any chance of discussion.\
Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement to the others.\
"Comrades," he said, "I trust that every animal here appreciates the sacrifice that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon himself. Do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! On the contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes more firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be? Suppose you had decided to follow Snowball, with his moonshine of windmills--Snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"\
"He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed," said somebody.\
"Bravery is not enough," said Squealer. "Loyalty and obedience are more important. And as to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will come when we shall find that Snowball's part in it was much exaggerated. Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword for today. One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you do not want Jones back?"\
Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not want Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable to bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had time to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right." And from then on he adopted the maxim, "Napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "I will work harder."\
By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun. The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every Sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to receive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean of flesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at the foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the animals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner before entering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together as they had done in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round them, and the other pigs sitting behind. The rest of the animals sat facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the orders for the week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'Beasts of England', all the animals dispersed.\
On the third Sunday after Snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhat surprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built after all. He did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work, it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however, had all been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. The building of the windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take two years.\
That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that Napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On the contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually been stolen from among Napoleon's papers. The windmill was, in fact, Napoleon's own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so strongly against it? Here Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, was Comrade Napoleon's cunning. He had SEEMED to oppose the windmill, simply as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous character and a bad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could go forward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was something called tactics. He repeated a number of times, "Tactics, comrades, tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. The animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke so persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further questions.\
\cf5 Chapter VI\
\cf0 All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in their work; they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything that they did was for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind who would come after them, and not for a pack of idle, thieving human beings.\
Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and in August Napoleon announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoons as well. This work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absented himself from it would have his rations reduced by half. Even so, it was found necessary to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a little less successful than in the previous year, and two fields which should have been sown with roots in the early summer were not sown because the ploughing had not been completed early enough. It was possible to foresee that the coming winter would be a hard one.\
The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry of limestone on the farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in one of the outhouses, so that all the materials for building were at hand. But the problem the animals could not at first solve was how to break up the stone into pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing this except with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because no animal could stand on his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort did the right idea occur to somebody-namely, to utilise the force of gravity. Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying all over the bed of the quarry. The animals lashed ropes round these, and then all together, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of the rope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they dragged them with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, where they were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. Transporting the stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. The horses carried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Muriel and Benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did their share. By late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, and then the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.\
But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day of exhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, and sometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. Nothing could have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength seemed equal to that of all the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder began to slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves dragged down the hill, it was always Boxer who strained himself against the rope and brought the boulder to a stop. To see him toiling up the slope inch by inch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground, and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration. Clover warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, but Boxer would never listen to her. His two slogans, "I will work harder" and "Napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to all problems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call him three-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour. And in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he would go alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it down to the site of the windmill unassisted.\
The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of the hardness of their work. If they had no more food than they had had in Jones's day, at least they did not have less. The advantage of only having to feed themselves, and not having to support five extravagant human beings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures to outweigh it. And in many ways the animal method of doing things was more efficient and saved labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could be done with a thoroughness impossible to human beings. And again, since no animal now stole, it was unnecessary to fence off pasture from arable land, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and gates. Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began to make them selves felt. There was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dog biscuits, and iron for the horses' shoes, none of which could be produced on the farm. Later there would also be need for seeds and artificial manures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for the windmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.\
One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders, Napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now onwards Animal Farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, of course, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain certain materials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the windmill must override everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements to sell a stack of hay and part of the current year's wheat crop, and later on, if more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale of eggs, for which there was always a market in Willingdon. The hens, said Napoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contribution towards the building of the windmill.\
Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to have any dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to make use of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed at that first triumphant Meeting after Jones was expelled? All the animals remembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that they remembered it. The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleon abolished the Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptly silenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheep broke into "Four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardness was smoothed over. Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for silence and announced that he had already made all the arrangements. There would be no need for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, which would clearly be most undesirable. He intended to take the whole burden upon his own shoulders. A Mr. Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon, had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal Farm and the outside world, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive his instructions. Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "Long live Animal Farm!" and after the singing of 'Beasts of England' the animals were dismissed.\
Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds at rest. He assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade and using money had never been passed, or even suggested. It was pure imagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated by Snowball. A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer asked them shrewdly, "Are you certain that this is not something that you have dreamed, comrades? Have you any record of such a resolution? Is it written down anywhere?" And since it was certainly true that nothing of the kind existed in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.\
Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was a sly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small way of business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone else that Animal Farm would need a broker and that the commissions would be worth having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind of dread, and avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight of Napoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on two legs, roused their pride and partly reconciled them to the new arrangement. Their relations with the human race were now not quite the same as they had been before. The human beings did not hate Animal Farm any less now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever. Every human being held it as an article of faith that the farm would go bankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the windmill would be a failure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another by means of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if it did stand up, then that it would never work. And yet, against their will, they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which the animals were managing their own affairs. One symptom of this was that they had begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased to pretend that it was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championship of Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to live in another part of the county. Except through Whymper, there was as yet no contact between Animal Farm and the outside world, but there were constant rumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreement either with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick of Pinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.\
It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse and took up their residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that a resolution against this had been passed in the early days, and again Squealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. It was absolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of the farm, should have a quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to the dignity of the Leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleon under the title of "Leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty. Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that the pigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-room as a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed it off as usual with "Napoleon is always right!", but Clover, who thought she remembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn and tried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there. Finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetched Muriel.\
"Muriel," she said, "read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not say something about never sleeping in a bed?"\
With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out.\
"It says, 'No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announced finally.\
Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandment mentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so. And Squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by two or three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in its proper perspective.\
"You have heard then, comrades," he said, "that we pigs now sleep in the beds of the farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, that there was ever a ruling against beds? A bed merely means a place to sleep in. A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. The rule was against sheets, which are a human invention. We have removed the sheets from the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. And very comfortable beds they are too! But not more comfortable than we need, I can tell you, comrades, with all the brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not rob us of our repose, would you, comrades? You would not have us too tired to carry out our duties? Surely none of you wishes to see Jones back?"\
The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was said about the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some days afterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up an hour later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was made about that either.\
By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year, and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for the winter were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated for everything. It was almost half built now. After the harvest there was a stretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever, thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks of stone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. Boxer would even come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by the light of the harvest moon. In their spare moments the animals would walk round and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength and perpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever have been able to build anything so imposing. Only old Benjamin refused to grow enthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothing beyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.\
November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop because it was now too wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when the gale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundations and several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn. The hens woke up squawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously of hearing a gun go off in the distance. In the morning the animals came out of their stalls to find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elm tree at the foot of the orchard had been plucked up like a radish. They had just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from every animal's throat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The windmill was in ruins.\
With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom moved out of a walk, raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit of all their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they had broken and carried so laboriously scattered all around. Unable at first to speak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleon paced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tail had grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him of intense mental activity. Suddenly he halted as though his mind were made up.\
"Comrades," he said quietly, "do you know who is responsible for this? Do you know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill? SNOWBALL!" he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. "Snowball has done this thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avenge himself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here under cover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, here and now I pronounce the death sentence upon Snowball. 'Animal Hero, Second Class,' and half a bushel of apples to any animal who brings him to justice. A full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"\
The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball could be guilty of such an action. There was a cry of indignation, and everyone began thinking out ways of catching Snowball if he should ever come back. Almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass at a little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for a few yards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffed deeply at them and pronounced them to be Snowball's. He gave it as his opinion that Snowball had probably come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.\
"No more delays, comrades!" cried Napoleon when the footprints had been examined. "There is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuilding the windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. We will teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily. Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shall be carried out to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Long live Animal Farm!"\
\cf5 Chapter VII\
\cf0 It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow, and then by a hard frost which did not break till well into February. The animals carried on as best they could with the rebuilding of the windmill, well knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envious human beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finished on time.\
Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it was Snowball who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen down because the walls were too thin. The animals knew that this was not the case. Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick this time instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting much larger quantities of stone. For a long time the quarry was full of snowdrifts and nothing could be done. Some progress was made in the dry frosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals could not feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. They were always cold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart. Squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity of labour, but the other animals found more inspiration in Boxer's strength and his never-failing cry of "I will work harder!"\
In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, and it was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make up for it. Then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crop had been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered thickly enough. The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible. For days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels. Starvation seemed to stare them in the face.\
It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world. Emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings were inventing fresh lies about Animal Farm. Once again it was being put about that all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they were continually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism and infanticide. Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might follow if the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to make use of Mr. Whymper to spread a contrary impression. Hitherto the animals had had little or no contact with Whymper on his weekly visits: now, however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remark casually in his hearing that rations had been increased. In addition, Napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be filled nearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered up with what remained of the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext Whymper was led through the store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. He was deceived, and continued to report to the outside world that there was no food shortage on Animal Farm.\
Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it would be necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. In these days Napoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in the farmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. When he did emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs who closely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently he did not even appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through one of the other pigs, usually Squealer.\
One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come in to lay again, must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, through Whymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. The price of these would pay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came on and conditions were easier.\
When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had been warned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had not believed that it would really happen. They were just getting their clutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take the eggs away now was murder. For the first time since the expulsion of Jones, there was something resembling a rebellion. Led by three young Black Minorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart Napoleon's wishes. Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay their eggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. Napoleon acted swiftly and ruthlessly. He ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed that any animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punished by death. The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. For five days the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to their nesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies were buried in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died of coccidiosis. Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were duly delivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take them away.\
All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to be hiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield. Napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmers than before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber which had been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared. It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; both Mr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon was hesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. It was noticed that whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement with Frederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, when he inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.\
Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowball was secretly frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbed that they could hardly sleep in their stalls. Every night, it was said, he came creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds of mischief. He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs, he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Whenever anything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If a window was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to say that Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of the store-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrown it down the well. Curiously enough, they went on believing this even after the mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. The cows declared unanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in their sleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said to be in league with Snowball.\
Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball's activities. With his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tour of inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at a respectful distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and snuffed the ground for traces of Snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detect by the smell. He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed, in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowball almost everywhere. He would put his snout to the ground, give several deep sniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, "Snowball! He has been here! I can smell him distinctly!" and at the word "Snowball" all the dogs let out blood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth.\
The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as though Snowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air about them and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. In the evening Squealer called them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face told them that he had some serious news to report.\
"Comrades!" cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terrible thing has been discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick of Pinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farm away from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. But there is worse than that. We had thought that Snowball's rebellion was caused simply by his vanity and ambition. But we were wrong, comrades. Do you know what the real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones from the very start! He was Jones's secret agent all the time. It has all been proved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only just discovered. To my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. Did we not see for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get us defeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?"\
The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball's destruction of the windmill. But it was some minutes before they could fully take it in. They all remembered, or thought they remembered, how they had seen Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of the Cowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how he had not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones's gun had wounded his back. At first it was a little difficult to see how this fitted in with his being on Jones's side. Even Boxer, who seldom asked questions, was puzzled. He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him, shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.\
"I do not believe that," he said. "Snowball fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed. I saw him myself. Did we not give him 'Animal Hero, first Class,' immediately afterwards?"\
"That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now--it is all written down in the secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying to lure us to our doom."\
"But he was wounded," said Boxer. "We all saw him running with blood."\
"That was part of the arrangement!" cried Squealer. "Jones's shot only grazed him. I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able to read it. The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give the signal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very nearly succeeded--I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it had not been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how, just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard, Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? And do you not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic was spreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with a cry of 'Death to Humanity!' and sank his teeth in Jones's leg? Surely you remember THAT, comrades?" exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.\
Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the animals that they did remember it. At any rate, they remembered that at the critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee. But Boxer was still a little uneasy.\
"I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he said finally. "What he has done since is different. But I believe that at the Battle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade."\
"Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," announced Squealer, speaking very slowly and firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--that Snowball was Jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from long before the Rebellion was ever thought of."\
"Ah, that is different!" said Boxer. "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right."\
"That is the true spirit, comrade!" cried Squealer, but it was noticed he cast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turned to go, then paused and added impressively: "I warn every animal on this farm to keep his eyes very wide open. For we have reason to think that some of Snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"\
Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animals to assemble in the yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleon emerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recently awarded himself "Animal Hero, First Class", and "Animal Hero, Second Class"), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growls that sent shivers down all the animals' spines. They all cowered silently in their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing was about to happen.\
Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered a high-pitched whimper. Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four of the pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, to Napoleon's feet. The pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood, and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement of everybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw them coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinned him to the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with their tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether he should crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to change countenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxer lifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.\
Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, with guilt written on every line of their countenances. Napoleon now called upon them to confess their crimes. They were the same four pigs as had protested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings. Without any further prompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch with Snowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him in destroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement with him to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick. They added that Snowball had privately admitted to them that he had been Jones's secret agent for years past. When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptly tore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whether any other animal had anything to confess.\
The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellion over the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared to them in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon's orders. They, too, were slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and confessed to having secreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them in the night. Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinking pool--urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball--and two other sheep confessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower of Napoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was suffering from a cough. They were all slain on the spot. And so the tale of confessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpses lying before Napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell of blood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.\
When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs, crept away in a body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not know which was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leagued themselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had just witnessed. In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshed equally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse now that it was happening among themselves. Since Jones had left the farm, until today, no animal had killed another animal. Not even a rat had been killed. They had made their way on to the little knoll where the half-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down as though huddling together for warmth--Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows, the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, except the cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered the animals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer remained on his feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against his sides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally he said:\
"I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things could happen on our farm. It must be due to some fault in ourselves. The solution, as I see it, is to work harder. From now onwards I shall get up a full hour earlier in the mornings."\
And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having got there, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down to the windmill before retiring for the night.\
The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they were lying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of Animal Farm was within their view--the long pasture stretching down to the main road, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fields where the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farm buildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear spring evening. The grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level rays of the sun. Never had the farm--and with a kind of surprise they remembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their own property--appeared to the animals so desirable a place. As Clover looked down the hillside her eyes filled with tears. If she could have spoken her thoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimed at when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of the human race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they had looked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them to rebellion. If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had been of a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, each working according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as she had protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night of Major's speech. Instead--she did not know why--they had come to a time when no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamed everywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces after confessing to shocking crimes. There was no thought of rebellion or disobedience in her mind. She knew that, even as things were, they were far better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that before all else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings. Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out the orders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon. But still, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hoped and toiled. It was not for this that they had built the windmill and faced the bullets of Jones's gun. Such were her thoughts, though she lacked the words to express them.\
At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she was unable to find, she began to sing 'Beasts of England'. The other animals sitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--very tunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung it before.\
They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer, attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having something important to say. He announced that, by a special decree of Comrade Napoleon, 'Beasts of England' had been abolished. From now onwards it was forbidden to sing it.\
The animals were taken aback.\
"Why?" cried Muriel.\
"It's no longer needed, comrade," said Squealer stiffly. "'Beasts of England' was the song of the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is now completed. The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act. The enemy both external and internal has been defeated. In 'Beasts of England' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come. But that society has now been established. Clearly this song has no longer any purpose."\
Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly have protested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of "Four legs good, two legs bad," which went on for several minutes and put an end to the discussion.\
So 'Beasts of England' was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet, had composed another song which began:\
Animal Farm, Animal Farm,\
Never through me shalt thou come to harm!\
and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag. But somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals to come up to 'Beasts of England'.\
\cf5 Chapter VIII\
\cf0 A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down, some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the Sixth Commandment decreed "No animal shall kill any other animal." And though no one cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it was felt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this. Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and when Benjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, she fetched Muriel. Muriel read the Commandment for her. It ran: "No animal shall kill any other animal WITHOUT CAUSE." Somehow or other, the last two words had slipped out of the animals' memory. But they saw now that the Commandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason for killing the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.\
Throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked in the previous year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick as before, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regular work of the farm, was a tremendous labour. There were times when it seemed to the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than they had done in Jones's day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a long strip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figures proving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased by two hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent, as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him, especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditions had been like before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days when they felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.\
All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs. Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight. When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but by a black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind of trumpeter, letting out a loud "cock-a-doodle-doo" before Napoleon spoke. Even in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartments from the others. He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him, and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in the glass cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also announced that the gun would be fired every year on Napoleon's birthday, as well as on the other two anniversaries.\
Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as "Napoleon." He was always referred to in formal style as "our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," and this pigs liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terror of Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings' Friend, and the like. In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down his cheeks of Napoleon's wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep love he bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animals who still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms. It had become usual to give Napoleon the credit for every successful achievement and every stroke of good fortune. You would often hear one hen remark to another, "Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laid five eggs in six days"; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, would exclaim, "Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent this water tastes!" The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in a poem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and which ran as follows:\
Friend of fatherless!\
Fountain of happiness!\
Lord of the swill-bucket! Oh, how my soul is on\
Fire when I gaze at thy\
Calm and commanding eye,\
Like the sun in the sky,\
Comrade Napoleon!\
\
Thou are the giver of\
All that thy creatures love,\
Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;\
Every beast great or small\
Sleeps at peace in his stall,\
Thou watchest over all,\
Comrade Napoleon!\
\
Had I a sucking-pig,\
Ere he had grown as big\
Even as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,\
He should have learned to be\
Faithful and true to thee,\
Yes, his first squeak should be\
"Comrade Napoleon!"\
Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wall of the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It was surmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer in white paint.\
Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged in complicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timber was still unsold. Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get hold of it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. At the same time there were renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attack Animal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had aroused furious jealousy in him. Snowball was known to be still skulking on Pinchfield Farm. In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed to hear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired by Snowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon. They were executed immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon's safety were taken. Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a young pig named Pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ate it, lest it should be poisoned.\
At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sell the pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into a regular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farm and Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though they were only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly. The animals distrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him to Frederick, whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and the windmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attack grew stronger and stronger. Frederick, it was said, intended to bring against them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed the magistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of the title-deeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terrible stories were leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties that Frederick practised upon his animals. He had flogged an old horse to death, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into the furnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight with splinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. The animals' blood boiled with rage when they heard of these things beingdone to their comrades, and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attack Pinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. But Squealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in Comrade Napoleon's strategy.\
Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sunday morning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never at any time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; he considered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings with scoundrels of that description. The pigeons who were still sent out to spread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere on Foxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "Death to Humanity" in favour of "Death to Frederick." In the late summer yet another of Snowball's machinations was laid bare. The wheat crop was full of weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visits Snowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. A gander who had been privy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediately committed suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries. The animals now also learned that Snowball had never--as many of them had believed hitherto--received the order of "Animal Hero, First Class." This was merely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of the Cowshed by Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he had been censured for showing cowardice in the battle. Once again some of the animals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon able to convince them that their memories had been at fault.\
In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had to be gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. The machinery had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating the purchase of it, but the structure was completed. In the teeth of every difficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luck and of Snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to the very day! Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round their masterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when it had been built the first time. Moreover, the walls were twice as thick as before. Nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! And when they thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they had overcome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their lives when the sails were turning and the dynamos running--when they thought of all this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and round the windmill, uttering cries of triumph. Napoleon himself, attended by his dogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; he personally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announced that the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.\
Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting in the barn. They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced that he had sold the pile of timber to Frederick. Tomorrow Frederick's wagons would arrive and begin carting it away. Throughout the whole period of his seeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secret agreement with Frederick.\
All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages had been sent to Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid Pinchfield Farm and to alter their slogan from "Death to Frederick" to "Death to Pilkington." At the same time Napoleon assured the animals that the stories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, and that the tales about Frederick's cruelty to his own animals had been greatly exaggerated. All these rumours had probably originated with Snowball and his agents. It now appeared that Snowball was not, after all, hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life: he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at Foxwood, and had in reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.\
The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon's cunning. By seeming to be friendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price by twelve pounds. But the superior quality of Napoleon's mind, said Squealer, was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick. Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque, which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written upon it. But Napoleon was too clever for him. He had demanded payment in real five-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber was removed. Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was just enough to buy the machinery for the windmill.\
Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was all gone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals to inspect Frederick's bank-notes. Smiling beatifically, and wearing both his decorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with the money at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhouse kitchen. The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxer put out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white things stirred and rustled in his breath.\
Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadly pale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yard and rushed straight into the farmhouse. The next moment a choking roar of rage sounded from Napoleon's apartments. The news of what had happened sped round the farm like wildfire. The banknotes were forgeries! Frederick had got the timber for nothing!\
Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voice pronounced the death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said, Frederick should be boiled alive. At the same time he warned them that after this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. Frederick and his men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinels were placed at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeons were sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped might re-establish good relations with Pilkington.\
The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast when the look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and his followers had already come through the five-barred gate. Boldly enough the animals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have the easy victory that they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There were fifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire as soon as they got within fifty yards. The animals could not face the terrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the efforts of Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. A number of them were already wounded. They took refuge in the farm buildings and peeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. The whole of the big pasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. For the moment even Napoleon seemed at a loss. He paced up and down without a word, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were sent in the direction of Foxwood. If Pilkington and his men would help them, the day might yet be won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sent out on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper from Pilkington. On it was pencilled the words: "Serves you right."\
Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The animals watched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men had produced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. They were going to knock the windmill down.\
"Impossible!" cried Napoleon. "We have built the walls far too thick for that. They could not knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!"\
But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two with the hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of the windmill. Slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded his long muzzle.\
"I thought so," he said. "Do you not see what they are doing? In another moment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."\
Terrified, the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of the shelter of the buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to be running in all directions. Then there was a deafening roar. The pigeons swirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flung themselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. When they got up again, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill had been. Slowly the breeze drifted it away. The windmill had ceased to exist!\
At this sight the animals' courage returned to them. The fear and despair they had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against this vile, contemptible act. A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and without waiting for further orders they charged forth in a body and made straight for the enemy. This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that swept over them like hail. It was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired again and again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out with their sticks and their heavy boots. A cow, three sheep, and two geese were killed, and nearly everyone was wounded. Even Napoleon, who was directing operations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. But the men did not go unscathed either. Three of them had their heads broken by blows from Boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow's horn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell. And when the nine dogs of Napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed to make a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men's flank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They saw that they were in danger of being surrounded. Frederick shouted to his men to get out while the going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running for dear life. The animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field, and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through the thorn hedge.\
They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limp back towards the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon the grass moved some of them to tears. And for a little while they halted in sorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood. Yes, it was gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even the foundations were partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could not this time, as before, make use of the fallen stones. This time the stones had vanished too. The force of the explosion had flung them to distances of hundreds of yards. It was as though the windmill had never been.\
As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absent during the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail and beaming with satisfaction. And the animals heard, from the direction of the farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.\
"What is that gun firing for?" said Boxer.\
"To celebrate our victory!" cried Squealer.\
"What victory?" said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoe and split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hind leg.\
"What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil--the sacred soil of Animal Farm?"\
"But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for two years!"\
"What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmills if we feel like it. You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing that we have done. The enemy was in occupation of this very ground that we stand upon. And now--thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon--we have won every inch of it back again!"\
"Then we have won back what we had before," said Boxer.\
"That is our victory," said Squealer.\
They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer's leg smarted painfully. He saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding the windmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he braced himself for the task. But for the first time it occurred to him that he was eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quite what they had once been.\
But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firing again--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that Napoleon made, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after all that they had won a great victory. The animals slain in the battle were given a solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served as a hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Two whole days were given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches, and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed on every animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits for each dog. It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle of the Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Order of the Green Banner, which he had conferred upon himself. In the general rejoicings the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.\
It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whisky in the cellars of the farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time when the house was first occupied. That night there came from the farmhouse the sound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of 'Beasts of England' were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon, wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones's, was distinctly seen to emerge from the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoors again. But in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. Not a pig appeared to be stirring. It was nearly nine o'clock when Squealer made his appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tail hanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriously ill. He called the animals together and told them that he had a terrible piece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was dying!\
A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of the farmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes they asked one another what they should do if their Leader were taken away from them. A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived to introduce poison into Napoleon's food. At eleven o'clock Squealer came out to make another announcement. As his last act upon earth, Comrade Napoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to be punished by death.\
By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and the following morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on the way to recovery. By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, and on the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchase in Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. A week later Napoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which it had previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animals who were past work, was to be ploughed up. It was given out that the pasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known that Napoleon intended to sow it with barley.\
About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone was able to understand. One night at about twelve o'clock there was a loud crash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. It was a moonlit night. At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where the Seven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces. Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at hand there lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint. The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him back to the farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. None of the animals could form any idea as to what this meant, except old Benjamin, who nodded his muzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.\
But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments to herself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals had remembered wrong. They had thought the Fifth Commandment was "No animal shall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten. Actually the Commandment read: "No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS."\
\cf5 Chapter IX\
\cf0 Boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started the rebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations were ended. Boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point of honour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. In the evenings he would admit privately to Clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clover treated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewing them, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard. "A horse's lungs do not last for ever," she said to him. But Boxer would not listen. He had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill well under way before he reached the age for retirement.\
At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated, the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows at fourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese at five. Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. As yet no animal had actually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussed more and more. Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been set aside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture was to be fenced off and turned into a grazing-ground for superannuated animals. For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds of corn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot or possibly an apple on public holidays. Boxer's twelfth birthday was due in the late summer of the following year.\
Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been, and food was even shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, except those of the pigs and the dogs. A too rigid equality in rations, Squealer explained, would have been contrary to the principles of Animalism. In any case he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they were NOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. For the time being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustment of rations (Squealer always spoke of it as a "readjustment," never as a "reduction"), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvement was enormous. Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he proved to them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips than they had had in Jones's day, that they worked shorter hours, that their drinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that a larger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they had more straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animals believed every word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for had almost faded out of their memories. They knew that life nowadays was harsh and bare, that they were often hungry and often cold, and that they were usually working when they were not asleep. But doubtless it had been worse in the old days. They were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days they had been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference, as Squealer did not fail to point out.\
There were many more mouths to feed now. In the autumn the four sows had all littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs between them. The young pigs were piebald, and as Napoleon was the only boar on the farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. It was announced that later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom would be built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs were given their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. They took their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing with the other young animals. About this time, too, it was laid down as a rule that when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animal must stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to have the privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.\
The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money. There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased, and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machinery for the windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house, sugar for Napoleon's own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on the ground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such as tools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump of hay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggs was increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barely hatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. Rations, reduced in December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in the stalls were forbidden to save oil. But the pigs seemed comfortable enough, and in fact were putting on weight if anything. One afternoon in late February a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had never smelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house, which had been disused in Jones's time, and which stood beyond the kitchen. Someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. The animals sniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was being prepared for their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the following Sunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reserved for the pigs. The field beyond the orchard had already been sown with barley. And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving a ration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself, which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.\
But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by the fact that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before. There were more songs, more speeches, more processions. Napoleon had commanded that once a week there should be held something called a Spontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate the struggles and triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animals would leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm in military formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows, then the sheep, and then the poultry. The dogs flanked the procession and at the head of all marched Napoleon's black cockerel. Boxer and Clover always carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and the horn and the caption, "Long live Comrade Napoleon!" Afterwards there were recitations of poems composed in Napoleon's honour, and a speech by Squealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production of foodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. The sheep were the greatest devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyone complained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near) that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, the sheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legs bad!" But by and large the animals enjoyed these celebrations. They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all, they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for their own benefit. So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer's lists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel, and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that their bellies were empty, at least part of the time.\
In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessary to elect a President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who was elected unanimously. On the same day it was given out that fresh documents had been discovered which revealed further details about Snowball's complicity with Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as the animals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle of the Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting on Jones's side. In fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of the human forces, and had charged into battle with the words "Long live Humanity!" on his lips. The wounds on Snowball's back, which a few of the animals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon's teeth.\
In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on the farm, after an absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still did no work, and talked in the same strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain. He would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour to anyone who would listen. "Up there, comrades," he would say solemnly, pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other side of that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain, that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from our labours!" He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights, and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake and lump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of the animals believed him. Their lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and just that a better world should exist somewhere else? A thing that was difficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses. They all declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountain were lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working, with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.\
After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, all the animals worked like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work of the farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhouse for the young pigs, which was started in March. Sometimes the long hours on insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. In nothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was not what it had been. It was only his appearance that was a little altered; his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunches seemed to have shrunken. The others said, "Boxer will pick up when the spring grass comes on"; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter. Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he braced his muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed that nothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. At such times his lips were seen to form the words, "I will work harder"; he had no voice left. Once again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of his health, but Boxer paid no attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching. He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone was accumulated before he went on pension.\
Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm that something had happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load of stone down to the windmill. And sure enough, the rumour was true. A few minutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "Boxer has fallen! He is lying on his side and can't get up!"\
About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where the windmill stood. There lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neck stretched out, unable even to raise his head. His eyes were glazed, his sides matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of his mouth. Clover dropped to her knees at his side.\
"Boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"\
"It is my lung," said Boxer in a weak voice. "It does not matter. I think you will be able to finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty good store of stone accumulated. I had only another month to go in any case. To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement. And perhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at the same time and be a companion to me."\
"We must get help at once," said Clover. "Run, somebody, and tell Squealer what has happened."\
All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to give Squealer the news. Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down at Boxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his long tail. After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathy and concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the very deepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers on the farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treated in the hospital at Willingdon. The animals felt a little uneasy at this. Except for Mollie and Snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm, and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of human beings. However, Squealer easily convinced them that the veterinary surgeon in Willingdon could treat Boxer's case more satisfactorily than could be done on the farm. And about half an hour later, when Boxer had somewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managed to limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a good bed of straw for him.\
For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out a large bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chest in the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day after meals. In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, while Benjamin kept the flies off him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for what had happened. If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live another three years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he would spend in the corner of the big pasture. It would be the first time that he had had leisure to study and improve his mind. He intended, he said, to devote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two letters of the alphabet.\
However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours, and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away. The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of a pig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from the direction of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It was the first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited--indeed, it was the first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "Quick, quick!" he shouted. "Come at once! They're taking Boxer away!" Without waiting for orders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farm buildings. Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn by two horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in a low-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. And Boxer's stall was empty.\
The animals crowded round the van. "Good-bye, Boxer!" they chorused, "good-bye!"\
"Fools! Fools!" shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping the earth with his small hoofs. "Fools! Do you not see what is written on the side of that van?"\
That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spell out the words. But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadly silence he read:\
"'Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealer in Hides and Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied.' Do you not understand what that means? They are taking Boxer to the knacker's!"\
A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on the box whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smart trot. All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices. Clover forced her way to the front. The van began to gather speed. Clover tried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. "Boxer!" she cried. "Boxer! Boxer! Boxer!" And just at this moment, as though he had heard the uproar outside, Boxer's face, with the white stripe down his nose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.\
"Boxer!" cried Clover in a terrible voice. "Boxer! Get out! Get out quickly! They're taking you to your death!"\
All the animals took up the cry of "Get out, Boxer, get out!" But the van was already gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertain whether Boxer had understood what Clover had said. But a moment later his face disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendous drumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to kick his way out. The time had been when a few kicks from Boxer's hoofs would have smashed the van to matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a few moments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. In desperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew the van to stop. "Comrades, comrades!" they shouted. "Don't take your own brother to his death!" But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realise what was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace. Boxer's face did not reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought of racing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment the van was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road. Boxer was never seen again.\
Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital at Willingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have. Squealer came to announce the news to the others. He had, he said, been present during Boxer's last hours.\
"It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!" said Squealer, lifting his trotter and wiping away a tear. "I was at his bedside at the very last. And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my ear that his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill was finished. 'Forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'Forward in the name of the Rebellion. Long live Animal Farm! Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon is always right.' Those were his very last words, comrades."\
Here Squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment, and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before he proceeded.\
It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumour had been circulated at the time of Boxer's removal. Some of the animals had noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked "Horse Slaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer was being sent to the knacker's. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer, that any animal could be so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whisking his tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their beloved Leader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that? But the explanation was really very simple. The van had previously been the property of the knacker, and had been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the old name out. That was how the mistake had arisen.\
The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer went on to give further graphic details of Boxer's death-bed, the admirable care he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon had paid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared and the sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by the thought that at least he had died happy.\
Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morning and pronounced a short oration in Boxer's honour. It had not been possible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains for interment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made from the laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer's grave. And in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorial banquet in Boxer's honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder of Boxer's two favourite maxims, "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleon is always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well to adopt as his own.\
On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up from Willingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That night there was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by what sounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with a tremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon on the following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or other the pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.\
\cf5 Chapter X\
\cf0 Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by. A time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before the Rebellion, except Clover, Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of the pigs.\
Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too was dead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country. Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who had known him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and with a tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but in fact no animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside a corner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since been dropped. Napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. Squealer was so fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only old Benjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer about the muzzle, and, since Boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.\
There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase was not so great as had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had been born to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word of mouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such a thing before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now besides Clover. They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and good comrades, but very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabet beyond the letter B. They accepted everything that they were told about the Rebellion and the principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, for whom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether they understood very much of it.\
The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even been enlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington. The windmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed a threshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildings had been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The windmill, however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. It was used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. The animals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one was finished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. But the luxuries of which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls with electric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were no longer talked about. Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to the spirit of Animalism. The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hard and living frugally.\
Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the animals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and the dogs. Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so many dogs. It was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion. There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in the supervision and organisation of the farm. Much of this work was of a kind that the other animals were too ignorant to understand. For example, Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every day upon mysterious things called "files," "reports," "minutes," and "memoranda". These were large sheets of paper which had to be closely covered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burnt in the furnace. This was of the highest importance for the welfare of the farm, Squealer said. But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food by their own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetites were always good.\
As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had always been. They were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from the pool, they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by the cold, and in summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones among them racked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the early days of the Rebellion, when Jones's expulsion was still recent, things had been better or worse than now. They could not remember. There was nothing with which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to go upon except Squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstrated that everything was getting better and better. The animals found the problem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating on such things now. Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail of his long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could be much better or much worse--hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, so he said, the unalterable law of life.\
And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for an instant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of Animal Farm. They were still the only farm in the whole county--in all England!--owned and operated by animals. Not one of them, not even the youngest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten or twenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard the gun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, their hearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towards the old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the Seven Commandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had been defeated. None of the old dreams had been abandoned. The Republic of the Animals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England should be untrodden by human feet, was still believed in. Some day it was coming: it might not be soon, it might not be with in the lifetime of any animal now living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of 'Beasts of England' was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a fact that every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared to sing it aloud. It might be that their lives were hard and that not all of their hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were not as other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannical human beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves. No creature among them went upon two legs. No creature called any other creature "Master." All animals were equal.\
One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and led them out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, which had become overgrown with birch saplings. The sheep spent the whole day there browsing at the leaves under Squealer's supervision. In the evening he returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, told the sheep to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for a whole week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them. Squealer was with them for the greater part of every day. He was, he said, teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.\
It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when the animals had finished work and were making their way back to the farm buildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard. Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks. It was Clover's voice. She neighed again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the yard. Then they saw what Clover had seen.\
It was a pig walking on his hind legs.\
Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used to supporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfect balance, he was strolling across the yard. And a moment later, out from the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on their hind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifle unsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of a stick, but every one of them made his way right round the yard successfully. And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and a shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself, majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and with his dogs gambolling round him.\
He carried a whip in his trotter.\
There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was as though the world had turned upside-down. Then there came a moment when the first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite of their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years, of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened--they might have uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, as though at a signal, all the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of--\
"Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER!"\
It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep had quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs had marched back into the farmhouse.\
Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was Clover. Her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she tugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn, where the Seven Commandments were written. For a minute or two they stood gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.\
"My sight is failing," she said finally. "Even when I was young I could not have read what was written there. But it appears to me that that wall looks different. Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be, Benjamin?"\
For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what was written on the wall. There was nothing there now except a single Commandment. It ran:\
ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL\
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS\
After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who were supervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. It did not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves a wireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken out subscriptions to 'John Bull', 'Tit-Bits', and the 'Daily Mirror'. It did not seem strange when Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse garden with a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones's clothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearing in a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while his favourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had been used to wearing on Sundays.\
A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm. A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour of inspection. They were shown all over the farm, and expressed great admiration for everything they saw, especially the windmill. The animals were weeding the turnip field. They worked diligently hardly raising their faces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened of the pigs or of the human visitors.\
That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse. And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals were stricken with curiosity. What could be happening in there, now that for the first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality? With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into the farmhouse garden.\
At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the way in. They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enough peered in at the dining-room window. There, round the long table, sat half a dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleon himself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigs appeared completely at ease in their chairs. The company had been enjoying a game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order to drink a toast. A large jug was circulating, and the mugs were being refilled with beer. No one noticed the wondering faces of the animals that gazed in at the window.\
Mr. Pilkington, of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In a moment, he said, he would ask the present company to drink a toast. But before doing so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon him to say.\
It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said--and, he was sure, to all others present--to feel that a long period of mistrust and misunderstanding had now come to an end. There had been a time--not that he, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments--but there had been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had been regarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certain measure of misgiving, by their human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents had occurred, mistaken ideas had been current. It had been felt that the existence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal and was liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood. Too many farmers had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit of licence and indiscipline would prevail. They had been nervous about the effects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employees. But all such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends had visited Animal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and what did they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline and an orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere. He believed that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farm did more work and received less food than any animals in the county. Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features which they intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.\
He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendly feelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and its neighbours. Between pigs and human beings there was not, and there need not be, any clash of interests whatever. Their struggles and their difficulties were one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere? Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring some carefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was too overcome by amusement to be able to utter it. After much choking, during which his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: "If you have your lower animals to contend with," he said, "we have our lower classes!" This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington once again congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours, and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.\
And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feet and make certain that their glasses were full. "Gentlemen," concluded Mr. Pilkington, "gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity of Animal Farm!"\
There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was so gratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink his mug against Mr. Pilkington's before emptying it. When the cheering had died down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he too had a few words to say.\
Like all of Napoleon's speeches, it was short and to the point. He too, he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. For a long time there had been rumours--circulated, he had reason to think, by some malignant enemy--that there was something subversive and even revolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had been credited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals on neighbouring farms. Nothing could be further from the truth! Their sole wish, now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal business relations with their neighbours. This farm which he had the honour to control, he added, was a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, which were in his own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.\
He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions still lingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of the farm which should have the effect of promoting confidence still further. Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom of addressing one another as "Comrade." This was to be suppressed. There had also been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marching every Sunday morning past a boar's skull which was nailed to a post in the garden. This, too, would be suppressed, and the skull had already been buried. His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flew from the masthead. If so, they would perhaps have noted that the white hoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now been removed. It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.\
He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr. Pilkington's excellent and neighbourly speech. Mr. Pilkington had referred throughout to "Animal Farm." He could not of course know--for he, Napoleon, was only now for the first time announcing it--that the name "Animal Farm" had been abolished. Henceforward the farm was to be known as "The Manor Farm"--which, he believed, was its correct and original name.\
"Gentlemen," concluded Napoleon, "I will give you the same toast as before, but in a different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen, here is my toast: To the prosperity of The Manor Farm!"\
There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied to the dregs. But as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed to them that some strange thing was happening. What was it that had altered in the faces of the pigs? Clover's old dim eyes flitted from one face to another. Some of them had five chins, some had four, some had three. But what was it that seemed to be melting and changing? Then, the applause having come to an end, the company took up their cards and continued the game that had been interrupted, and the animals crept silently away.\
But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar of voices was coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked through the window again. Yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. There were shoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furious denials. The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon and Mr. Pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.\
Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question, now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already it was impossible to say which was which.\
November 1943-February 1944\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
}